CHAPTER 16
Dilutive Securities and Earnings per Share
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the accounting for the issuance, conversion, and retirement of
convertible securities.
2. Describe the accounting for share warrants and for share warrants issued with
other securities.
3. Describe the accounting and reporting for share compensation plans.
4. Compute basic earnings per share.
5. Compute diluted earnings per share.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 16
As the following opening story indicates, companies are rethinking the use of various
forms of share-based compensation, which are based on dilutive securities. The
purpose of this chapter is to discuss the proper accounting for dilutive securities. The
chapter examines issues related to other types of financial instruments, such as
convertible securities, warrants, and contingent shares, including their effects on
reporting earnings per share. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.
Breaking the Options Habit

--- Page 1251 ---
Determining the components of executive pay has been the subject of debate in company
board compensation committees. Share options have been a significant component in many
pay packages. The share option habit has been hard to break. As you will learn in this
chapter, share options—called by some “the crack cocaine of incentives”—are a form of
compensation that gives key employees the choice to purchase shares at a given (usually
lower-than-market) price. For many years, companies were hooked on these products.
Why? The combination of a hot equity market and favorable accounting treatment made
share options the incentive of choice. They were a form of compensation with no expense to
the companies that granted them, and the share options were popular with key employees,
so companies granted them with abandon.
However, the accounting rules changed, resulting in required expensing of the fair value of
share options when granted. This treatment made it easier for companies to kick the share
option habit. As shown in the following table, a shift has occurred in the use of share
options versus restricted shares for both large companies and high-tech companies.
 
Large
Companies
High-Tech
Companies
 
2016
2013
2016
2013
Types of equity awards granted—by number of units
(median)
 
 
 
 
Share options
56%
74%
67%
76%
Restricted shares
46
26
33
24
Types of equity awards granted—by value of awards
(median)
 
 
 
 
Share options
22
48
44
55
Restricted shares
78
52
56
45
In fact, starting in 2006 (at the time companies began implementing the standard on share
compensation), both large and high-tech companies started switching to restricted-share
plans. As a spokesperson at one company said, “Once you begin expensing options, the
attractiveness significantly drops.”
Option awards in most cases are reserved for the key officers of a company. And while there
has been a decline in the use of options in executive pay packages, equity-based
compensation continues to be significant for companies around the world. One recent study
(Equilar, CEO Pay Trends) indicates that the median value of the cash component was $1.9
million, and the median equity component was $2.8 million. As shown in the following
chart, the significance of the equity-based component persists across the United States,
Canada, and Europe.

--- Page 1252 ---
Approximately 50 percent of the overall compensation of U.S. CEOs took the form of
shares. Similarly, European and Canadian CEOs of companies received a median cash
component of $1.8 million and $1.5 million, respectively. However, equity components
were significantly less than the median U.S. figure, at $2.2 million and $1.4 million,
respectively. Given the persistence and significance of share-based compensation, good
accounting for these costs—which you will learn about in this chapter—is a necessity.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with
solutions, are also available online.
Dilutive Securities
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the accounting for the issuance, conversion, and retirement of convertible
securities.
Debt and Equity
Many of the controversies related to the accounting for financial instruments such as share
options, convertible securities, and preference shares relate to whether companies should
report these instruments as a liability or as equity. For example, companies should classify
non-redeemable ordinary shares as equity because the issuer has no obligation to pay
dividends or repurchase the shares. Declaration of dividends is at the issuer’s discretion, as
is the decision to repurchase the shares. Similarly, preference shares that are not
redeemable do not require the issuer to pay dividends or repurchase the shares. Thus, non-
redeemable ordinary or preference shares lack an important characteristic of a liability—an

--- Page 1253 ---
obligation to pay the holder of the ordinary or preference shares at some point in the
future.1
In this chapter, we discuss securities that have characteristics of both debt and equity. For
example, a convertible bond has both debt and equity characteristics. Should a company
classify this security as debt, as equity, or as part debt and part equity? In addition, how
should a company compute earnings per share if it has convertible bonds and other
convertible securities in its capital structure? Convertible securities, as well as options,
warrants, and other securities, are often called dilutive securities because upon exercise
they may reduce (dilute) earnings per share.
Convertible Debt
Convertible bonds can be changed into other company securities during some specified
period of time after issuance. A convertible bond combines the benefits of a bond with the
privilege of exchanging it for shares at the holder’s option. Investors who purchase it want
the security of a bond investment (guaranteed interest and principal) plus the added option
of conversion if the value of the shares appreciates significantly.
Companies issue convertible securities for two main reasons. One is to raise equity capital
without giving up more ownership control than necessary. To illustrate, assume a company
wants to raise $1 million; its ordinary shares are selling at $45 a share. To raise the $1
million, the company would have to sell 22,222 shares (ignoring issue costs). By selling
1,000 bonds at $1,000 par, each convertible into 20 ordinary shares, the company could
raise $1 million by committing only 20,000 ordinary shares.
A second reason to issue convertibles is to obtain debt financing at cheaper rates. Many
companies could issue debt only at high interest rates unless they attached a conversion
option. The conversion privilege entices the investor to accept a lower interest rate than
would normally be the case on a straight debt issue. For example, China Minsheng Bank
(CHN) recently issued convertible bonds that pay interest at an effective yield of 1.5
percent. This rate was much lower than China Minsheng would have had to pay by issuing
straight debt. For this lower interest rate, the investor receives the right to buy China
Minsheng’s ordinary shares at a fixed price until the bond’s maturity.2
Accounting for Convertible Debt
Convertible debt is accounted for as a compound instrument because it contains both a
liability and an equity component. IFRS requires that compound instruments be separated
into their liability and equity components for purposes of accounting. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) Companies use the
“with-and-without” method to value compound instruments.
Illustration 16.1 identifies the components used in the with-and-without method.
ILLUSTRATION 16.1 Convertible Debt Components

--- Page 1254 ---
As indicated, the equity component is the residual amount after subtracting the liability
component. IFRS does not permit companies to assign a value to the equity amount first
and then determine the liability component. To do so would be inconsistent with the
definition of equity, which is considered a residual amount. [2]
To implement the with-and-without approach, a company does the following:
1. First, determine the total fair value of the convertible debt with both the liability and
equity component. This is straightforward, as this amount is the proceeds
received upon issuance.
2. Second, determine the liability component by computing the net present value of all
contractual future cash flows discounted at the market rate of interest. This market
rate is the rate the company would pay on similar non-convertible debt.
3. Finally, subtract the liability component estimated in the second step from the fair
value of the convertible debt (issue proceeds) to arrive at the equity component. That
is, the equity component is the fair value of the convertible debt without the liability
component.
Accounting at Time of Issuance
To illustrate the accounting for convertible debt, assume that Roche Group (CHE) issues
2,000 convertible bonds at the beginning of 2022. The bonds have a four-year term with a
stated rate of interest of 6 percent and are issued at par with a face value of €1,000 per bond
(the total proceeds received from issuance of the bonds are €2,000,000). Interest is payable
annually at December 31. Each bond is convertible into 250 ordinary shares with a par value
of €1. The market rate of interest on similar non-convertible debt is 9 percent.
The time diagram in Illustration 16.2 depicts both the interest and principal cash flows.
ILLUSTRATION 16.2 Time Diagram for Convertible Bond
The liability component of the convertible debt is computed as shown in Illustration 16.3.
Present value of principal: €2,000,000 × .70843 (Table 6.2; n = 4, i = 9%)
€1,416,860
Present value of the interest payments: €120,000 × 3.23972 (Table 6.4; n = 4, i
= 9%)
388,766
Present value of the liability component
€1,805,626
ILLUSTRATION 16.3 Fair Value of Liability Component of Convertible Bond

--- Page 1255 ---
The equity component of Roche’s convertible debt is then computed as shown in
Illustration 16.4.
Fair value of convertible debt at date of issuance
€2,000,000
Less: Fair value of liability component at date of issuance
1,805,626
Fair value of equity component at date of issuance
€
 194,374
ILLUSTRATION 16.4 Equity Component of Convertible Bond
The journal entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Cash
2,000,000  
Bonds Payable
 
1,805,626
Share Premium—Conversion Equity  
194,374
The liability component of Roche’s convertible debt issue is recorded as Bonds Payable. As
shown in Chapter 14, the amount of the discount relative to the face value of the bond is
amortized at each reporting period. So at maturity, the Bonds Payable account is reported at
€2,000,000 (face value). The equity component of the convertible bond is recorded in the
Share Premium—Conversion Equity account and is reported in the equity section of the
statement of financial position. Because this amount is considered part of contributed
capital, it does not change over the life of the convertible.3
Settlement of Convertible Bonds
We illustrate four settlement situations: (1) repurchase at maturity, (2) conversion at
maturity, (3) conversion before maturity, and (4) repurchase before maturity.
Repurchase at maturity
If the bonds are not converted at maturity, Roche makes the following entry to pay off the
convertible debtholders.
Bonds Payable
2,000,000  
Cash
 
2,000,000
(To record the redemption of bonds at maturity)  
 
Because the carrying value of the bonds equals the face value, there is no gain or loss on
repurchase at maturity. The amount originally allocated to equity of €194,374 either
remains in the Share Premium—Conversion Equity account or is transferred to Share
Premium—Ordinary.
Conversion of bonds at maturity
If the bonds are converted at maturity, Roche makes the following entry.
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
194,374  
Bonds Payable
2,000,000  

--- Page 1256 ---
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
500,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
1,694,374
(To record the conversion of bonds at maturity)  
 
As indicated, Roche records a credit to Share Capital—Ordinary for €500,000 (2,000 bonds
× 250 shares × €1 par) and the remainder to Share Premium—Ordinary for €1,694,374.
There is no gain or loss on conversion at maturity. The original amount allocated to equity
(€194,374) is transferred to the Share Premium—Ordinary account. As a result, Roche’s
equity has increased by a total of €2,194,374 through issuance and conversion of the
convertible bonds. This accounting approach is often referred to as the book value
method in that the carrying amount (book value) of the bond and related conversion
equity determines the amount in the ordinary equity accounts.
Conversion of bonds before maturity
What happens if bonds are converted before maturity? To understand the accounting, we
again use the Roche Group example. A schedule of bond amortization related to Roche’s
convertible bonds is shown in Illustration 16.5.
Schedule of Bond Amortization
Effective-Interest Method
6% Bond Discounted at 9%
Date
Cash Paid Interest Expense Discount Amortized Carrying Amount of Bonds
1/1/22
 
 
 
€1,805,626
12/31/22 €120,000
€162,506
€42,506
1,848,132
12/31/23
120,000
166,332
46,332
1,894,464
12/31/24
120,000
170,502
50,502
1,944,966
12/31/25
120,000
175,034*
55,034
2,000,000
*€13 difference due to rounding.
ILLUSTRATION 16.5 Convertible Bond Amortization Schedule
Assuming that Roche converts its bonds into ordinary shares on December 31, 2023, Roche
debits the Bonds Payable account for its carrying value of €1,894,464 (see Illustration 16.5).
In addition, Roche credits Share Capital—Ordinary for €500,000 (2,000 × 250 × €1) and
credits Share Premium—Ordinary for €1,588,838. The entry to record this conversion is as
follows.
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
194,374  
Bonds Payable
1,894,464  
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
500,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
1,588,838
(To record the conversion of bonds before maturity)  
 
There is no gain or loss on conversion before maturity: The original amount allocated to
equity (€194,374) is transferred to the Share Premium—Ordinary account.

--- Page 1257 ---
Repurchase before maturity
In some cases, companies decide to repurchase the convertible debt before maturity. The
approach used for allocating the amount paid upon repurchase follows the approach used
when the convertible bond was originally issued. That is, Roche determines the fair value of
the liability component of the convertible bonds at December 31, 2023, and then subtracts
this amount from the fair value of the convertible bond issue (including the equity
component) to arrive at the value for the equity. After this allocation is completed:
1. The difference between the consideration allocated to the liability component and the
carrying amount of the liability is recognized as a gain or loss, and
2. The amount of consideration relating to the equity component is recognized (as a
reduction) in equity. [3]
To illustrate, instead of converting the bonds on December 31, 2023, assume that Roche
repurchases the convertible bonds from the bondholders. Pertinent information related to
this conversion is as follows.
Fair value of the convertible debt (including both liability and equity components),
based on market prices at December 31, 2023, is €1,965,000.
The fair value of the liability component is €1,904,900. This amount is based on
computing the present value of a non-convertible bond with a two-year term (which
corresponds to the shortened time to maturity of the repurchased bonds).
Roche first determines the gain or loss on the liability component, as computed in
Illustration 16.6.
Present value of liability component at December 31, 2023 (given above)
€ 1,904,900
Carrying value of liability component at December 31, 2023 (per Illustration
16.5)
(1,894,464)
Loss on repurchase
€
 10,436
ILLUSTRATION 16.6 Gain or Loss on Debt Repurchase
Roche has a loss on this repurchase because the fair value of the debt extinguished is
greater than its carrying amount. To determine any adjustment to the equity, Roche
computes the value of the equity as shown in Illustration 16.7.
Fair value of convertible debt at December 31, 2023 (with equity
component)
€1,965,000
Less: Fair value of liability component at December 31, 2023 (similar 2-year
non-convertible debt)
1,904,900
Fair value of equity component at December 31, 2023 (without debt
component)
€
 60,100
ILLUSTRATION 16.7 Equity Adjustment on Repurchase of Convertible Bonds

--- Page 1258 ---
Roche makes the following compound journal entry to record the entire repurchase
transaction.
Bonds Payable
1,894,464  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
60,100  
Loss on Repurchase
10,436  
Cash
 
1,965,000
(To record the repurchase of convertible bonds)  
 
In summary, the repurchase results in a loss related to the liability component and a
reduction in Share Premium—Conversion Equity. The remaining balance in Share Premium
—Conversion Equity of €134,274 (€194,374 − €60,100) is often transferred to Share
Premium—Ordinary upon the repurchase.
Induced Conversions
Sometimes, the issuer wants to encourage prompt conversion of its convertible debt to
equity securities in order to reduce interest costs or to improve its debt to equity ratio. In
this situation, the issuer may offer some form of additional consideration (such as cash or
ordinary shares), called a “sweetener,” to induce conversion. The issuing company
reports the sweetener as an expense of the current period. Its amount is the fair value of the
additional securities or other consideration given.
Assume that Helloid, Inc. has outstanding $1,000,000 par value convertible debentures
convertible into 100,000 ordinary shares ($1 par value). When issued, Helloid recorded
Share Premium—Conversion Equity of $15,000. Helloid wishes to reduce its annual
interest cost. To do so, Helloid agrees to pay the holders of its convertible debentures an
additional $80,000 if they will convert. Assuming conversion occurs, Helloid makes the
following entry.
Conversion Expense
80,000  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
15,000  
Bonds Payable
1,000,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
100,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
915,000
Cash
 
80,000
Helloid records the additional $80,000 as an expense of the current period and not as a
direct reduction of equity. [4]
Some argue that the cost of a conversion inducement is a cost of obtaining equity capital. As
a result, they contend that companies should recognize the cost of conversion as a cost of (a
reduction of) the equity capital acquired and not as an expense. However, the IASB
indicated that when an issuer makes an additional payment to encourage conversion, the
payment is for a service (bondholders converting at a given time) and should be reported as
an expense.
Convertible Preference Shares

--- Page 1259 ---
Convertible preference shares include an option for the holder to convert preference
shares into a fixed number of ordinary shares. The major difference between accounting for
a convertible bond and a convertible preference share is their classification. Convertible
bonds are compound instruments because they have both a liability and an equity
component. Convertible preference shares (unless mandatory redemption exists) are not
compound instruments because they have only an equity component. As a result,
convertible preference shares are reported as part of equity. When preference shares are
converted or repurchased, there is no gain or loss recognized. The rationale is that a
company does not recognize a gain or loss involving transactions with its existing
shareholders.
To illustrate, assume that Morse AG issues 1,000 convertible preference shares that have a
par value of €1 per share. The shares were issued at a price of €200 per share. The journal
entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Cash (1,000 × €200)
200,000  
Share Capital—Preference (1,000 × €1)
 
1,000
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
 
199,000
(To record the issuance of convertible preference shares)  
 
If each share is subsequently converted into 25 ordinary shares (€2 par value) that have a
fair value of €410,000, the journal entry to record the conversion is as follows.
Share Capital—Preference
1,000  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
199,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary (1,000 × 25 × €2)
 
50,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
150,000
(To record the conversion of convertible preference shares)  
 
As indicated (and similar to the treatment for convertible bonds), Morse uses the book
value method and does not recognize a gain or loss on the conversion. The fair value of the
ordinary shares is therefore ignored in this computation. If the convertible preference
shares are repurchased at their fair value instead of converted, Morse makes the following
entry.
Share Capital—Preference
1,000  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity
199,000  
Retained Earnings
210,000  
Cash
 
410,000
(To record the repurchase of convertible preference shares)  
 
Morse does not report a gain or loss on the repurchase. Any excess paid above the book
value of the convertible preference shares is often debited to Retained Earnings on the
theory that an excess dividend is being paid to the preference shareholders to facilitate the
repurchase.

--- Page 1260 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
How Low Can You Go?
What do SONY (JPN), Tesla Motors Inc. (USA), Twitter Inc. (USA), Qihoo 360
Technology (CHN), and semiconductor maker ASE (TWN) have in common? They
are part of the wave of companies that have raised capital in the convertible bond
market. And quite a wave it is. As indicated in the following chart, in the past two
decades companies have issued over $40 billion of convertible bonds.
These bonds are popular with issuing companies and investors. Companies use them to
raise money at rates lower than those on ordinary bonds. Investors like them because,
at a time of low interest rates, they can book extra profit if the issuer’s share price rises.
However, depending on the features of the bond and the share value, some unusual
results may be observed.
Consider the convertible bonds issued by STMicroelectronics (STM) (CHE). STM’s
10-year bonds have a zero coupon and are convertible into STM ordinary shares at an
exercise price of $33.43. When issued, the bonds sold at an effective yield of minus
0.05 percent. That’s right—a negative yield. How could this happen? When STM issued
the bonds, investors thought the options to convert were so valuable that they were
willing to take zero interest payments and invest an amount in excess of the maturity
value of the bonds.
In essence, the investors are paying interest to STM, and STM records interest revenue.
Why would investors do this? If the share price rises, as many thought it would for
STM and many tech companies at this time, these bond investors could convert and get
a big gain in the shares.
Investors did get some additional protection in the deal: They can redeem the $1,000
bonds after three years and receive $975 (and after five and seven years, for lower

--- Page 1261 ---
amounts) if it looks like the bonds will never convert. In the end, STM has issued
bonds with a significant unrecorded equity component. And because the entire bond
issue is classified as debt under U.S. GAAP, STM records negative interest expense.
Sources: STM Financial Reports. See also Floyd Norris, “Legal but Absurd: They Borrow a Billion and Report a
Profit,” The New York Times (August 8, 2003), p. C1; Mariko Yasu, “Sony Shares Plunge after Convertible Bond
Offering: Tokyo Mover,” Bloomberg (November 14, 2012); P.Davies, “Asia Turns Bullish on Convertible Bonds,”
Financial Times (September 1, 2013); and Daniel Kruger, “Rising Rates Revitalize Convertible-Bond Sales,” Wall
Street Journal (December 10, 2018).
Share Warrants
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Describe the accounting for share warrants and for share warrants issued with other
securities.
Warrants are certificates entitling the holder to acquire shares at a certain price within a
stated period. This option is similar to the conversion privilege: Warrants, if exercised,
become ordinary shares and usually have a dilutive effect (reduce earnings per share)
similar to that of the conversion of convertible securities. However, a substantial difference
between convertible securities and share warrants is that upon exercise of the warrants, the
holder has to pay a certain amount of money to obtain the shares.
The issuance of warrants or options to buy additional shares normally arises under three
situations:
1. When issuing different types of securities, such as bonds or preference shares,
companies often include warrants to make the security more attractive—by
providing an “equity kicker.”
2. Upon the issuance of additional ordinary shares, existing shareholders have a
preemptive right to purchase ordinary shares first. Companies may issue
warrants to evidence that right.
3. Companies give warrants, often referred to as share options, to executives and
employees as a form of compensation.
The problems in accounting for share warrants are complex and present many difficulties—
some of which remain unresolved. The following sections address the accounting for share
warrants in three situations.
Share Warrants Issued with Other Securities
Warrants issued with other securities are basically long-term options to buy ordinary shares
at a fixed price. Generally, the life of warrants is five years, occasionally 10 years; very
occasionally, a company may offer perpetual warrants.
A share warrant works like this. Assume that Bohai Pharmaceutical Group (CHN)
offers a unit comprising one ordinary share and one share warrant. In this case, Bohai’s

--- Page 1262 ---
warrants are detachable; that is, they can be detached (separated) from the ordinary shares
and traded as a separate security.
Companies may also issue non-detachable warrants with debt, which means the warrant
cannot be separated from the debt. In either case, debt issued with warrants is considered a
compound instrument for accounting purposes. The Bohai warrant in this example is
exercisable at ¥24.25 per share and good for five years. The unit (share plus detachable
warrant) sells for ¥22.75. Since the price of the ordinary share the day before the sale was
¥19.88, the difference suggests a price of ¥2.87 for the warrant.
The investor pays for the warrant in order to receive the right to buy ordinary shares, at a
fixed price of ¥24.25, sometime in the future. It would not be profitable at present for the
purchaser to exercise the warrant and buy the share because the price of the share is much
below the exercise price. But if, for example, the price of the share rises to ¥30, the investor
gains ¥2.88 (¥30 − ¥24.25 − ¥2.87) on an investment of ¥2.87, a 100 percent increase! If
the price never rises, the investor loses the full ¥2.87 per warrant.4
Thus, debt issued with share warrants is a compound instrument that has a debt and an
equity component. As a result, the company should use the with-and-without method to
allocate the proceeds between the two components.
Illustration
At one time, Siemens AG (DEU) issued bonds with detachable five-year warrants. Assume
that the five-year warrants provide the option to buy one ordinary share (par value €5) at
€25. At the time, an ordinary share of Siemens was selling for approximately €30. These
warrants enabled Siemens to price its bond offering (with a €10,000,000 face value) at par
with an 8¾ percent yield (quite a bit lower than prevailing rates at that time). In this
example, Siemens was able to sell the bonds plus the warrants for €10,200,000.
To account for the proceeds from this sale, Siemens uses the with-and-without method.
Using this approach, Siemens determines the present value of the future cash flows related
to the bonds, which is €9,707,852. It then subtracts this amount from €10,200,000 to
determine the equity component. Determination of the equity component, using the with-
and-without method, is shown in Illustration 16.8.
Fair value of bonds with warrants
€10,200,000
Less: Fair value of liability component at date of issuance
9,707,852
Equity component at date of issuance
€
 492,148
ILLUSTRATION 16.8 Equity Component of Security Issue
In this situation, the bonds sell at a discount. Siemens records the sale as follows.
Cash
9,707,852  
Bonds Payable  
9,707,852
In addition, Siemens sells warrants that it credits to Share Premium—Share Warrants. It
makes the following entry.
Cash
492,148  
Share Premium—Share Warrants  
492,148

--- Page 1263 ---
Siemens may combine the entries if desired. Here, we show them separately, to indicate
that the purchaser of the bond is buying not only a bond but also a possible future claim on
ordinary shares.
Assuming investors exercise all 10,000 warrants (one warrant per one ordinary share),
Siemens makes the following entry.
Cash (10,000 × €25)
250,000  
Share Premium—Share Warrants
492,148  
Share Capital—Ordinary (10,000 × €5)  
50,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
692,148
What if investors fail to exercise the warrants? In that case, Siemens debits Share Premium
—Share Warrants for €492,148 and credits Share Premium—Expired Share Warrants for a
like amount. The Share Premium—Expired Share Warrants reverts to the former
shareholders.
Summary Analysis
The IASB indicates that companies should separate the debt and equity components of
securities, such as convertible debt or bonds issued with warrants. We agree with this
position. In both situations (convertible debt and debt issued with warrants), the investor
has made a payment to the company for an equity feature—the right to acquire an equity
instrument in the future. The only real distinction between them is that the additional
payment made when the equity instrument is formally acquired takes different forms. The
warrant holder pays additional cash to the issuing company; the convertible debtholder
pays for shares by forgoing the receipt of interest from the conversion date until maturity
and by forgoing the receipt of the maturity value itself. Thus, the difference is one of
method or form of payment only, rather than one of substance.
Rights to Purchase Additional Shares
If the directors of a company decide to issue new ordinary shares, the old shareholders
generally have the right (preemptive privilege) to purchase newly issued shares in
proportion to their holdings. This privilege, referred to as a share right, saves existing
shareholders from suffering a dilution of voting rights without their consent. Also, it may
allow them to purchase shares somewhat below their market price. Unlike the warrants
issued with other securities, the warrants issued for share rights are of short duration.
The certificate representing the share right states the number of shares the holder of the
right may purchase. Each share owned ordinarily gives the owner one share right. The
certificate also states the price at which the new shares may be purchased. The price is
normally less than the current market price of such shares, which gives the rights a value in
themselves. From the time they are issued until they expire, holders of share rights may
purchase and sell them like any other security.
Companies make only a memorandum entry when they issue rights to existing
shareholders. This entry indicates the number of rights issued to existing shareholders in
order to ensure that the company has additional unissued shares registered for issuance in
case the rights are exercised. Companies make no formal entry at this time because they
have not yet issued shares nor received cash.

--- Page 1264 ---
If holders exercise the share rights, a cash payment of some type usually is involved. If the
company receives cash equal to the par value, it makes an entry crediting Share Capital—
Ordinary at par value. If the company receives cash in excess of par value, it credits Share
Premium—Ordinary for the amount received above par value. If it receives cash less than
par value, a debit to Share Premium—Ordinary is appropriate.
Share Compensation Plans
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Describe the accounting and reporting for share compensation plans.
The third form of warrant arises in share compensation plans to pay and motivate
employees. This warrant is a share option, which gives key employees the option to
purchase ordinary shares at a given price over an extended period of time.
A consensus of opinion is that effective compensation programs are ones that do the
following:
1. Base compensation on employee and company performance.
2. Motivate employees to high levels of performance.
3. Help retain executives and allow for recruitment of new talent.
4. Maximize the employee’s after-tax benefit and minimize the employer’s after-tax cost.
5. Use performance criteria over which the employee has control.
Straight cash-compensation plans (salary and perhaps a bonus), though important, are
oriented to the short run. Many companies recognize that they need a longer-term
compensation plan in addition to the cash component.
Long-term compensation plans attempt to develop company loyalty among key employees
by giving them “a piece of the action”—that is, an equity or ownership interest. These plans,
generally referred to as share-based compensation plans, come in many forms.
Essentially, they provide the employee with the opportunity to receive shares if the
performance of the company (by whatever measure) is satisfactory. Typical performance
measures focus on long-term improvements that are readily measurable and that benefit
the company as a whole, such as increases in earnings per share, revenues, share price, or
market share.
Illustration 16.9 indicates that the cost of options is a much smaller element of
compensation relative to restricted shares at global companies such as Ford (USA) and
Disney (USA).

--- Page 1265 ---
($ in millions) U.S. Company Option Grants Restricted-Share Grants
Disney
$102
$312
Ford
27
95
Urban Outfitters
3
10
Walmart
23
365
ILLUSTRATION 16.9 Company Equity Grants
As discussed in the opening story, the major reasons for this change are twofold. Critics
often cite the indiscriminate use of share options as a reason why company executives
manipulated accounting numbers in an attempt to achieve higher share price. As a result,
many responsible companies decided to cut back on the issuance of options, both to avoid
such accounting manipulations and to head off investor doubts. In addition, IFRS now
results in companies recording a higher expense when share options are granted.
The data reported in Illustration 16.10 part (a) reinforce the point made in the opening
story that the fair value of share grants is a significant component of compensation. For the
100 largest non-tech companies in the S&P 500, 81 percent are providing some mix of
share-based compensation elements. Part (b) of Illustration 16.10 indicates the recent
compensation breakdown for the CEO of Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR). Note
that the share-based component nearly equals the pay received in cash—a relationship that
is typical for many public companies.
ILLUSTRATION 16.10 Compensation Elements
Measurement—Share Compensation

--- Page 1266 ---
Suppose that, as an employee for Hurdle Inc., you receive options to purchase 10,000
shares of the firm’s ordinary shares as part of your compensation. The date you receive the
options is referred to as the grant date. The options are good for 10 years. The market
price and the exercise price for the shares are both $20 at the grant date. What is the
value of the compensation you just received?
Some believe that what you have received has no value. They reason that because the
difference between the market price and the exercise price is zero, no compensation results.
Others argue these options do have value. If the share price goes above $20 any time in the
next 10 years and you exercise the options, you may earn substantial compensation. For
example, if at the end of the fourth year the share market price is $30 and you exercise your
options, you could earn $100,000 [10,000 options × ($30 − $20)], ignoring income taxes.
The question for Hurdle is how to report the granting of these options. One approach
measures compensation cost by the excess of the market price of the shares over their
exercise price at the grant date. This approach is referred to as the intrinsic-value
method. It measures what the holder would receive today if the option was immediately
exercised. The intrinsic value is the difference between the market price of the
shares and the exercise price of the options at the grant date. Using the intrinsic-
value method, Hurdle would not recognize any compensation expense related to your
options because at the grant date the market price equaled the exercise price. (In the
preceding paragraph, those who answered that the options had no value were looking at the
question from the intrinsic-value approach.)
The second way to look at the question of how to report the granting of these options bases
the cost of employee share options on the fair value of the share options granted. Under
the fair value method, companies use acceptable option-pricing models to value the
options at the date of grant. These models take into account the many factors that
determine an option’s underlying value.5
The IASB guidelines require that companies recognize compensation cost using the fair
value method. [5] The IASB position is that companies should base the accounting for the
cost of employee services on the fair value of compensation paid. This amount is presumed
to be a measure of the value of the services received. We will discuss more about the
politics of IFRS in this area later (see “Debate over Share-Option Accounting” section). Let’s
first describe the procedures involved.
Recognition—Share Compensation
Share-Option Plans
Share-option plans involve two main accounting issues:
1. How to determine compensation expense.
2. Over what periods to allocate compensation expense.
Determining Expense
Under the fair value method, companies compute total compensation expense based on
the fair value of the options expected to vest on the date they grant the options to the

--- Page 1267 ---
employee(s) (i.e., the grant date).6 Public companies estimate fair value by using an
option-pricing model, with some adjustments for the unique factors of employee share
options. No adjustments occur after the grant date in response to subsequent changes in
the share price—either up or down.
Allocating Compensation Expense
In general, a company recognizes compensation expense in the periods in which its
employees perform the service—the service period. Unless otherwise specified, the
service period is the vesting period—the time between the grant date and the vesting date.
Thus, the company determines total compensation cost at the grant date and allocates it to
the periods benefited by its employees’ services.
Share Compensation Example
An example will help show the accounting for a share-option plan. Assume that on
November 1, 2021, the shareholders of Chen Ltd. approve a plan that grants the company’s
five executives options to purchase 2,000 shares each of the company’s ¥100 par value
ordinary shares. The company grants the options on January 1, 2022. The executives may
exercise the options at any time within the next 10 years. The option price per share is
¥6,000, and the market price of the shares at the date of grant is ¥7,000 per share.
Under the fair value method, the company computes total compensation expense by
applying an acceptable fair value option-pricing model (such as the Black-Scholes option-
pricing model). To keep this illustration simple, we assume that the fair value option-
pricing model determines Chen’s total compensation expense to be ¥22,000,000.
Basic Entries
Under the fair value method, a company recognizes the value of the options as an expense
in the periods in which the employee performs services. In the case of Chen Ltd., assume
that the expected period of benefit is two years, starting with the grant date. Chen would
record the transactions related to this option contract as follows.
As indicated, Chen allocates compensation expense evenly over the two-year service period.

--- Page 1268 ---
Exercise
If Chen’s executives exercise 2,000 of the 10,000 options (20 percent of the options) on
June 1, 2025 (three years and five months after date of grant), the company records the
following journal entry.
June 1, 2025
Cash (2,000 × ¥6,000)
12,000,000  
Share Premium—Share Options (.20 × ¥22,000,000)
4,400,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary (2,000 × ¥100)
 
200,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
16,200,000
Expiration
If Chen’s executives fail to exercise the remaining share options before their expiration
date, the company transfers the balance in the Share Premium—Share Options account to a
more properly titled share premium account, such as Share Premium—Expired Share
Options. Chen records this transaction at the date of expiration as follows.
January 1, 2032 (expiration date)
Share Premium—Share Options
17,600,000  
Share Premium—Expired Share Options (.80 × ¥22,000,000)  
17,600,000
Adjustment
An unexercised share option does not nullify the need to record the costs of services
received from executives and attributable to the share-option plan. Under IFRS, a company
therefore does not adjust compensation expense upon expiration of the options.
Once the total compensation is measured at the date of grant, can it be changed in future
periods? The answer is that it depends on whether the adjustment is caused by a service or
market condition. A service condition requires employees to complete a specified period
of service to receive the award. If a service condition exists, the company is permitted to
adjust the number of share options expected to the actual number of instruments vested.
Thus, compensation can be adjusted. The company should adjust the estimate of
compensation expense recorded in the current period (as a change in estimate). A company
records this change in estimate by debiting Share Premium—Share Options and crediting
Compensation Expense for the amount of cumulative compensation expense recorded to
date (thus decreasing compensation expense in the period of forfeiture).
A market condition results when vesting or exercisability of the share option depends on
a performance condition, such as a rise in the market price of the company’s ordinary
shares. Because market conditions are reflected in the determination of fair value at the
grant date, no adjustment to compensation expense is permitted.
Many question this accounting treatment. The practice of not reversing share-option
awards due to market conditions (share price stays below exercise price) means that a
company may recognize an expense for an option that is never exercised. However, if the

--- Page 1269 ---
reason the option is not exercised relates to a service condition (failure to stay as an
employee and perform services), the compensation expense related to the option is
adjusted. In summary, estimates of the number of share options that are expected to vest
are adjusted to the actual number that do vest. Cancellations due to market conditions are
not adjusted.7
Restricted Shares
As indicated earlier, many companies are also using restricted shares (or replacing options
altogether) to compensate employees. Restricted-share plans transfer shares to
employees, subject to an agreement that the shares cannot be sold, transferred, or pledged
until vesting occurs. Similar to share options, these shares are subject to forfeiture if the
conditions for vesting are not met.8
Major advantages of restricted-share plans are:
1. Restricted shares never become completely worthless. In contrast, if the share
price does not exceed the exercise price for a share option, the options are worthless.
The restricted shares, however, still have value.
2. Restricted shares generally result in less dilution to existing shareholders.
Restricted-share awards are usually one-half to one-third the size of share options. For
example, if a company issues share options on 1,000 shares, an equivalent restricted-
share offering might be 333 to 500 shares. The reason for the difference is that at the
end of the vesting period, the restricted shares will have value, whereas the share
options may not. As a result, fewer shares are involved in restricted-share plans, and
therefore less dilution results if the share price rises.
3. Restricted shares better align the employee incentives with the companies’
incentives. The holder of restricted shares is essentially a shareholder and should be
more interested in the long-term objectives of the company. In contrast, the recipients
of share options often have a short-run focus, which leads to taking risks to hype the
share price for short-term gain to the detriment of the long term.
The accounting for restricted shares follows the same general principles as accounting for
share options at the date of grant. That is, the company determines the fair value of the
restricted shares at the date of grant (usually the fair value of a share) and then expenses
that amount over the service period. Subsequent changes in the fair value of the shares are
ignored for purposes of computing compensation expense.
Restricted Shares Example
Assume that on January 1, 2022, Ogden Company issues 1,000 restricted shares to its CEO,
Christie DeGeorge. Ogden’s shares have a fair value of $20 per share on January 1, 2022.
Additional information is as follows.
The service period related to the restricted shares is five years.
Vesting occurs if DeGeorge stays with the company for a five-year period.
The par value is $1 per share.

--- Page 1270 ---
Ogden makes the following entry on the grant date (January 1, 2022).
Unearned Compensation
20,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary (1,000 × $1)
 
1,000
Share Premium—Ordinary (1,000 × $19)  
19,000
The credits to Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium—Ordinary indicate that Ogden
has issued shares. The debit to Unearned Compensation (often referred to as Deferred
Compensation Expense) identifies the total compensation expense the company will
recognize over the five-year period. Unearned Compensation represents the cost of
services yet to be performed, which is not an asset. Consequently, the company
reports Unearned Compensation in equity in the statement of financial position, as a contra
equity account (similar to the reporting of treasury shares at cost).
At December 31, 2022, Ogden records compensation expense of $4,000 (1,000 shares × $20
× .20) as follows.
Compensation Expense
4,000  
Unearned Compensation  
4,000
Ogden records compensation expense of $4,000 for each of the next four years (2023, 2024,
2025, and 2026).
What happens if DeGeorge leaves the company before the five years has elapsed (that is,
she does not fulfill a service condition)? In this situation, DeGeorge forfeits her rights to
the shares, and Ogden reverses the compensation expense already recorded.
For example, assume that DeGeorge leaves on February 3, 2024 (before any expense has
been recorded during 2024). The entry to record this forfeiture is as follows.
Share Capital—Ordinary
1,000  
Share Premium—Ordinary
19,000  
Compensation Expense ($4,000 × 2)  
8,000
Unearned Compensation
 
12,000
In this situation, Ogden reverses the compensation expense of $8,000 recorded through
2023. In addition, the company debits Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium—
Ordinary, reflecting DeGeorge’s forfeiture. It credits the balance of Unearned
Compensation since none remains when DeGeorge leaves Ogden.
This accounting is similar to accounting for share options when employees do not fulfill
vesting requirements. Recall that once compensation expense is recorded for share options,
it is not reversed. The only exception is when an employee leaves a company early, and so
does not fulfill a service condition.
In Ogden’s restricted-share plan, vesting never occurred because DeGeorge left the
company before she met the service requirement. Because DeGeorge was never vested, she
had to forfeit her shares. Therefore, the company must reverse compensation expense
recorded to date.9
Employee Share-Purchase Plans

--- Page 1271 ---
Employee share-purchase plans (ESPPs) generally permit all employees to purchase
shares at a discounted price for a short period of time. The company often uses such plans
to secure equity capital or to induce widespread ownership of its ordinary shares among
employees. These plans are considered compensatory and should be recorded as
expense over the service period.
To illustrate, assume that Masthead plc offers all its 1,000 employees the opportunity to
participate in an employee share-purchase plan. Under the terms of the plan, the employees
are entitled to purchase 100 ordinary shares (par value £1 per share) at a 20 percent
discount. The purchase price must be paid immediately upon acceptance of the offer. In
total, 800 employees accept the offer, and each employee purchases on average 80 shares.
That is, the employees purchase a total of 64,000 shares. The weighted-average market
price of the shares at the purchase date is £30 per share, and the weighted-average purchase
price is £24 per share. The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Cash (64,000 × £24)
1,536,000  
Compensation Expense [64,000 × (£30 − £24)]
384,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary (64,000 × £1)
 
64,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
1,856,000
(Issue shares in an employee share-purchase plan)  
 
The IASB indicates that there is no reason to treat broad-based employee share plans
differently from other employee share plans. Some have argued that because these plans
are used to raise capital, they should not be compensatory. However, IFRS requires
recording expense for these arrangements. The Board notes that because these
arrangements are available only to employees, it is sufficient to conclude that the benefits
provided represent employee compensation.10 [6]
Disclosure of Compensation Plans
Companies must fully disclose the status of their compensation plans at the end of the
periods presented. To meet these objectives, companies must make extensive disclosures.
Specifically, a company with one or more share-based payment arrangements must disclose
information that enables users of the financial statements to understand:
1. The nature and extent of share-based payment arrangements that existed during the
period.
2. How the fair value of the goods and services received, or the fair value of the equity
instruments granted during the period, was determined.
3. The effect of share-based payment transactions on the company’s net income (loss)
during the period and on its financial position. [7]
Illustration 16.11 presents the type of information disclosed for compensation plans.
Debate over Share-Option Accounting
The IASB faced considerable opposition when it proposed the fair value method for
accounting for share options. This is not surprising, given that the fair value method results

--- Page 1272 ---
in greater compensation costs relative to the intrinsic-value model.
Many small high-technology companies have been especially vocal in their opposition,
arguing that only through offering share options can they attract top professional
management. They contend that recognizing large amounts of compensation expense under
these plans places them at a competitive disadvantage against larger companies that can
withstand higher compensation charges. As one high-tech executive stated, “If your goal is
to attack fat-cat executive compensation in multi-billion dollar firms, then please do so! But
not at the expense of the people who are ‘running lean and mean,’ trying to build
businesses and creating jobs in the process.”
The share-option saga is a classic example of the difficulty the IASB faces in issuing new
accounting guidance. Many powerful interests aligned against the Board. Even some who
initially appeared to support the Board’s actions later reversed themselves. These efforts
undermine the authority of the IASB at a time when it is essential that we restore faith in
our financial reporting system (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
The share-option controversy involves economic-consequence issues. The IASB
believes companies should follow the neutrality concept. Others disagree, noting that
factors other than accounting theory should be considered.
Transparent financial reporting—including recognition of share-based expense—should not
be criticized because companies will report lower income. We may not like what the
financial statements say, but we are always better off when the statements are
representationally faithful to the underlying economic substance of transactions.
By leaving share-based compensation expense out of income, reported income is biased.
Biased reporting not only raises concerns about the credibility of companies’ reports but
also of financial reporting in general. Even good companies get tainted by the biased
reporting of a few “bad apples.” If we write standards to achieve some social, economic, or
public policy goal, financial reporting loses its credibility.

--- Page 1273 ---
ILLUSTRATION 16.11 Share-Option Plan Disclosure
Basic Earnings per Share
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Compute basic earnings per share.
The financial press frequently reports earnings per share data. Further, shareholders and
potential investors widely use this data in evaluating the profitability of a company.
Earnings per share indicates the income earned by each ordinary share. Thus,

--- Page 1274 ---
companies report earnings per share only for ordinary shares. For example, if
Oscar SA has net income of €300,000 and a weighted average of 100,000 ordinary shares
outstanding for the year, earnings per share is €3 (€300,000 ÷ 100,000). Because of the
importance of earnings per share information, companies must report this information on
the face of the income statement. [8] The exception, due to the cost constraint, is non-
public companies.11 Generally, companies report earnings per share information below net
income in the income statement. Illustration 16.12 shows Oscar SA’s income statement
presentation of earnings per share.
Net income
€300,000
Earnings per share
€3.00
ILLUSTRATION 16.12 Income Statement Presentation of EPS
When the income statement contains discontinued operations, companies are required to
report earnings per share from continuing and discontinued operations and net income on
the face of the income statement. The presentation in Illustration 16.13 is representative.
Earnings per share:
 
Income from continuing operations
€4.00
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax
0.60
Net income
€3.40
ILLUSTRATION 16.13 Income Statement Presentation of EPS Components
These disclosures enable the user of the financial statements to compare performance
between different companies in the same reporting period and between different reporting
periods for the same company. Even though earnings per share data have limitations
because of the different accounting policies that may be used for determining “earnings,” a
consistently determined denominator enhances financial reporting. [9]
Earnings per Share—Simple Capital Structure
A company’s capital structure is simple if it consists only of ordinary shares or includes no
potential ordinary shares that upon conversion or exercise could dilute earnings per
ordinary share. In this case, a company reports basic earnings per share (EPS). A
capital structure is complex if it includes securities (potential ordinary shares) that could
have a dilutive effect on earnings per ordinary share.12 In this situation, a company reports
both basic and diluted earnings per share (EPS).
The computation of basic earnings per share for a simple capital structure involves two
items (other than net income): (1) preference share dividends and (2) weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding.
Preference Share Dividends
As we indicated earlier, earnings per share relates to earnings per ordinary share. When a
company has both ordinary and preference shares outstanding, it subtracts the current-
year preference share dividend from net income to arrive at income available to

--- Page 1275 ---
ordinary shareholders. Illustration 16.14 shows the formula for computing earnings
per share.
Earnings per Share =
ILLUSTRATION 16.14 Formula for Computing Earnings per Share
In reporting earnings per share information, a company must calculate income available to
ordinary shareholders. To do so, the company subtracts dividends on preference shares
from income from continuing operations and net income. If a company declares dividends
on preference shares and a net loss occurs, the company adds the preference dividend
to the loss (thereby increasing the amount of the loss) for purposes of computing the loss
per share.
If the preference shares are cumulative and the company declares no dividend in the
current year, it subtracts (or adds) an amount equal to the dividend that it should
have declared for the current year only from net income (or to the loss). The company
should have included dividends in arrears for previous years in the previous years’
computations.13
Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares Outstanding
In all computations of earnings per share, the weighted-average ordinary shares
outstanding during the period constitutes the basis for the per share amounts reported.
Shares issued or purchased during the period affect the amount outstanding. Companies
must weight the shares by the fraction of the period they are outstanding. The
rationale for this approach is to find the equivalent number of whole shares outstanding for
the year.
To illustrate, assume that Franks Inc. has changes in its ordinary shares outstanding for the
period, as shown in Illustration 16.15.
Date
Share Changes
Shares Outstanding
Jan. 1
Beginning balance
90,000
Apr. 1
Issued 30,000 shares for cash
30,000
 
 
120,000
July 1
Purchased 39,000 shares
(39,000)
 
 
81,000
Nov. 1
Issued 60,000 shares for cash
60,000
Dec. 31 Ending balance
141,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.15 Shares Outstanding, Ending Balance—Franks Inc.
Franks computes the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding as shown in
Illustration 16.16.
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares Outstanding

--- Page 1276 ---
 
(A)
(B)
(C)
Dates Outstanding Shares Outstanding Fraction of Year Weighted Shares (A × B)
Jan. 1–Apr. 1
90,000
3/12
22,500
Apr. 1–July 1
120,000
3/12
30,000
July 1–Nov. 1
81,000
4/12
27,000
Nov. 1–Dec. 31
141,000
2/12
23,500
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
103,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.16 Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares Outstanding
As Illustration 16.16 shows, 90,000 shares were outstanding for three months, which
translates to 22,500 whole shares for the entire year. Because Franks issued additional
shares on April 1, it must weight these shares for the time outstanding. When the company
purchased 39,000 shares on July 1, it reduced the shares outstanding. Therefore, from July
1 to November 1, only 81,000 shares were outstanding, which is equivalent to 27,000
shares. The issuance of 60,000 shares increases shares outstanding for the last two months
of the year. Franks then makes a new computation to determine the proper weighted shares
outstanding.
Share Dividends and Share Splits
When share dividends or share splits occur, companies need to restate the shares
outstanding before the share dividend or split, in order to compute the weighted-average
ordinary shares. For example, assume that Vijay Ltd. had 100,000 shares outstanding on
January 1 and issued a 25 percent share dividend on June 30. For purposes of computing a
weighted average for the current year, it assumes the additional 25,000 shares outstanding
as a result of the share dividend to be outstanding since the beginning of the year.
Thus, the weighted average for the year for Vijay is 125,000 shares.
Companies restate the issuance of a share dividend or share split, but not the issuance or
repurchase of shares for cash. Why? Because share splits and share dividends do not
increase or decrease the net assets of the company. The company merely issues additional
shares. Because of the added shares, it must restate the weighted-average shares. Restating
allows valid comparisons of earnings per share between periods before and after the share
split or share dividend. Conversely, the issuance or purchase of shares for cash changes
the amount of net assets. As a result, the company earns more, or less, in the future
because of this change in net assets. Stated another way, a share dividend or split does
not change the shareholders’ total investment—it only increases (unless it is a
reverse share split) the number of ordinary shares representing this investment.
To illustrate how a share dividend affects the computation of the weighted-average ordinary
shares outstanding, assume that Sabrina Company has the following changes in its ordinary
shares during the year, as shown in Illustration 16.17.

--- Page 1277 ---
Date
Share Changes
Shares Outstanding
January 1
Beginning balance
100,000
March 1
Issued 20,000 shares for cash
20,000
 
 
120,000
June 1
60,000 additional shares (50% share dividend)
60,000
 
 
180,000
November 1
Issued 30,000 shares for cash
30,000
December 31 Ending balance
210,000
ILLUSTRATION 
16.17 
Shares 
Outstanding, 
Ending 
Balance—Sabrina
Company
Sabrina computes the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding as shown in
Illustration 16.18.
 
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Dates
Outstanding
Shares
Outstanding
Restatement
Fraction of
Year
Weighted Shares (A × B ×
C)
Jan. 1–Mar. 1
100,000
1.50
2/12
25,000
Mar. 1–June 1
120,000
1.50
3/12
45,000
June 1–Nov. 1
180,000
 
5/12
75,000
Nov. 1–Dec. 31
210,000
 
2/12
35,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
180,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.18 Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares Outstanding—
Share Issue and Share Dividend
Sabrina must restate the shares outstanding prior to the share dividend. The company
adjusts the shares outstanding from January 1 to June 1 for the share dividend, so that it
now states these shares on the same basis as shares issued subsequent to the share
dividend. Sabrina does not restate shares issued after the share dividend because they are
on the new basis. The share dividend simply restates existing shares. The same type of
treatment applies to a share split.
If a share dividend or share split occurs after the end of the year but before the financial
statements are authorized for issuance, the company must restate the weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding for the year (and any other years presented in comparative
form). For example, assume that Hendricks Company computes its weighted-average
ordinary shares as 100,000 for the year ended December 31, 2022. On January 15, 2023,
before authorizing the issuance of the financial statements, the company splits its shares 3
for 1. In this case, the weighted-average ordinary shares used in computing earnings per
share for 2022 is now 300,000 shares. If Hendricks provides earnings per share
information for 2021 as comparative information, Hendricks must also adjust it for the
share split.
Comprehensive Example

--- Page 1278 ---
Let’s study a comprehensive illustration for a simple capital structure. Diaz SA has income
from continuing operations of R$580,000 and a gain on discontinued operations, net of tax,
of R$240,000. In addition, it has declared preference dividends of R$1 per share on 100,000
shares of preference shares outstanding. Diaz also has the following changes in its ordinary
shares outstanding during 2022, as shown in Illustration 16.19.
Date
Share Changes
Shares Outstanding
January 1
Beginning balance
180,000
May 1
Purchased 30,000 treasury shares
30,000
 
 
150,000
July 1
300,000 additional shares (3-for-1 share split)
540,000
 
 
690,000
December 31 Issued 50,000 shares for cash
50,000
December 31 Ending balance
740,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.19 Shares Outstanding, Ending Balance—Diaz SA
To compute the earnings per share information, Diaz determines the weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding as shown in Illustration 16.20.
 
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Dates
Outstanding
Shares
Outstanding
Restatement
Fraction of
Year
Weighted Shares (A × B ×
C)
Jan. 1–May 1
180,000
3
4/12
180,000
May 1–July 1
150,000
3
2/12
75,000
July 1–Dec. 31
690,000
 
6/12
225,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
480,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.20 Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares Outstanding
In computing the weighted-average ordinary shares, the company ignores the shares sold
on December 31, 2022, because they have not been outstanding during the year. Diaz then
divides the weighted-average ordinary shares into income from continuing operations and
net income to determine earnings per share. It subtracts its preference dividends of
R$100,000 from income from continuing operations (R$580,000) to arrive at income from
continuing operations available to ordinary shareholders of R$480,000 (R$580,000 −
R$100,000).
Deducting the preference dividends from the income from continuing operations also
reduces net income without affecting the gain on discontinued operations. The final
amount is referred to as income available to ordinary shareholders, as shown in
Illustration 16.21.

--- Page 1279 ---
 
(A)
(B)
(C)
 
Income
Information
Weighted
Shares
Earnings per
Share (A ÷ B)
Income from continuing operations available
to ordinary shareholders
R$480,000*
480,000
R$1.00
Gain on discontinued operations (net of tax)
240,000
480,000
0.50
Income available to ordinary shareholders
R$720,000
480,000
R$1.50
*R$580,000 − R$100,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.21 Computation of Income Available to Ordinary
Shareholders
Diaz must disclose the per share amount for gain on discontinued operations (net of tax)
either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to the financial statements.
Illustration 16.22 shows the income and per share information reported on the face of
Diaz’s income statement.
Income from continuing operations
R$580,000
Gain on discontinued operations, net of tax
240,000
Net income
R$820,000
Earnings per share:
 
Income from continuing operations (R$580,000 – R$100,000)
R$1.00
Gain on discontinued operations, net of tax
0.50
Net income
R$1.50
ILLUSTRATION 16.22 Earnings per Share, with Gain on Discontinued
Operations
Diluted Earnings per Share
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Compute diluted earnings per share.
The EPS discussion to this point applies to basic EPS for a simple capital structure. One
problem with a basic EPS computation is that it fails to recognize the potential impact of a
company’s dilutive securities. As discussed at the beginning of the chapter, dilutive
securities are securities that can be converted to ordinary shares.14 Upon conversion or
exercise by the holder, the dilutive securities reduce (dilute) earnings per share. This
adverse effect on EPS can be significant and, more importantly, unexpected unless financial
statements call attention to their potential dilutive effect.
As indicated earlier, a complex capital structure exists when a company has convertible
securities, options, warrants, or other rights that upon conversion or exercise could dilute
earnings per share. When a company has a complex capital structure, it reports both
basic and diluted earnings per share.

--- Page 1280 ---
Computing diluted EPS is similar to computing basic EPS. The difference is that diluted
EPS includes the effect of all potential dilutive ordinary shares that were outstanding
during the period. The formula in Illustration 16.23 shows the relationship between basic
EPS and diluted EPS.
ILLUSTRATION 16.23 Relation between Basic and Diluted EPS
Some securities are antidilutive. Antidilutive securities are securities that upon
conversion or exercise increase earnings per share (or reduce the loss per share).
Companies with complex capital structures will not report diluted EPS if the securities in
their capital structure are antidilutive. The purpose of presenting both basic and diluted
EPS is to inform financial statement users of situations that will likely occur (basic EPS)
and also to provide “worst case” dilutive situations (dilutive EPS). If the securities are
antidilutive, the likelihood of conversion or exercise is considered remote. Thus, companies
that have only antidilutive securities must report only the basic EPS number. We illustrated
the computation of basic EPS in the prior section. In the following sections, we address the
effects of convertible and other dilutive securities on EPS calculations.
Diluted EPS—Convertible Securities
At conversion, companies exchange convertible securities for ordinary shares. Companies
measure the dilutive effects of potential conversion on EPS using the if-converted
method. This method for a convertible bond assumes (1) the conversion of the convertible
securities at the beginning of the period (or at the time of issuance of the security, if issued
during the period), and (2) the elimination of related interest, net of tax. Thus, the
additional shares assumed issued increase the denominator—the weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding. The amount of interest expense, net of tax, increases the
numerator—net income.
Comprehensive Example—If-Converted Method
As an example, Mayfield Ltd. has net income of £210,000 for the year and 100,000
weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding during the same period. The basic earnings
per share is therefore £2.10 (£210,000 ÷ 100,000). The company has two convertible
debenture bond issues outstanding. One is a 6 percent issue sold at 100 (total £1,000,000)
in a prior year and convertible into 20,000 ordinary shares. Interest expense for the current
year related to the liability component of this convertible bond is £62,000.15 The other is a 7

--- Page 1281 ---
percent issue sold at 100 (total £1,000,000) on April 1 of the current year and convertible
into 32,000 ordinary shares. Interest expense for the first full year related to the liability
component of this convertible bond is £80,000. The tax rate is 40 percent.
As Illustration 16.24 shows, to determine the numerator for diluted earnings per share,
Mayfield adds back the interest on the if-converted securities, less the related tax effect.
Because the if-converted method assumes conversion as of the beginning of the year,
Mayfield assumes that it pays no interest on the convertibles during the year. The effective
interest on the 6 percent convertibles is £62,000 for the year. The increased tax expense is
£24,800 (£62,000 × 0.40). The interest added back net of taxes is £37,200 (£62,000 −
£24,800) or simply £62,000 × (1 − 0.40).
Net income for the year
£210,000
Add: Adjustment for interest (net of tax)
 
6% debentures (£62,000 × [1 −.40])
37,200
7% debentures (£80,000 × 9/12 × [1 −.40])
36,000
Adjusted net income
£283,200
ILLUSTRATION 16.24 Computation of Adjusted Net Income
Continuing with the information in Illustration 16.24, because Mayfield issues 7 percent
convertibles subsequent to the beginning of the year, it weights the shares. In other words,
it considers these shares to have been outstanding from April 1 to the end of the year. As a
result, the interest adjustment to the numerator for these bonds reflects the interest for
only nine months. Thus, the interest added back on the 7 percent convertible is £36,000
[£80,000 × 9/12 year × (1 − 0.4)]. The final item in Illustration 16.24 shows the adjusted
net income. This amount becomes the numerator for Mayfield’s computation of diluted
earnings per share.
Mayfield then calculates the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding, as shown in
Illustration 16.25. This number of shares becomes the denominator for Mayfield’s
computation of diluted earnings per share.
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
100,000
Add: Shares assumed to be issued:
 
6% debentures (as of beginning of year)
20,000
7% debentures (as of date of issue, April 1; 9/12 × 32,000)
24,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares adjusted for dilutive securities 144,000
ILLUSTRATION 16.25 Computation of Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares
In its income statement, Mayfield reports basic and diluted earnings per share.16
Illustration 16.26 shows this dual presentation.

--- Page 1282 ---
Net income for the year
£210,000
Earnings per Share (Note X)
 
Basic earnings per share (£210,000 ÷ 100,000)
£2.10
Diluted earnings per share (£283,200 ÷ 144,000)
£1.97
ILLUSTRATION 16.26 Earnings per Share Disclosure
Other Factors
The conversion rate on a dilutive security may change during the period in which the
security is outstanding. For the diluted EPS computation in such a situation, the company
uses the most dilutive conversion rate available. [10] For example, assume that a
company issued a convertible bond on January 1, 2020, with a conversion rate of 10
ordinary shares for each bond starting January 1, 2022. Beginning January 1, 2023, the
conversion rate is 12 ordinary shares for each bond. Beginning January 1, 2029, it is 15
ordinary shares for each bond. In computing diluted EPS in 2020, the company uses the
conversion rate of 15 shares to one bond.
Another issue relates to preference shares. For example, assume that Mayfield’s 6 percent
convertible debentures were instead 6 percent convertible preference shares. In that
case, Mayfield considers the convertible preference shares as potential ordinary shares.
Thus, it includes them in its diluted EPS calculations as shares outstanding. The company
does not subtract preference dividends from net income in computing the numerator. Why
not? Because for computing EPS, the company assumes conversion of the convertible
preference shares to outstanding ordinary shares, and no preference dividends would have
been paid. The company uses net income as the numerator—it computes no tax effect
because preference dividends generally are not tax-deductible.
Diluted EPS—Options and Warrants
A company includes in diluted earnings per share all share options and warrants
outstanding (whether or not presently exercisable), unless they are antidilutive. Companies
use the treasury-share method to include options and warrants and their equivalents in
EPS computations.
The treasury-share method assumes that the options or warrants are exercised at the
beginning of the year (or date of issue if later) and that the company uses those proceeds to
purchase ordinary shares for the treasury. If the exercise price is lower than the market
price of the shares, then the proceeds from exercise are insufficient to buy back all the
shares. The company then adds the incremental shares remaining to the weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding for purposes of computing diluted earnings per share.
For example, if the exercise price of a warrant is €5 and the fair value of the shares is €15,
the treasury-share method increases the shares outstanding. Exercise of the warrant results
in one additional share outstanding, but the €5 received for the one share issued is
insufficient to purchase one share in the market at €15. The company needs to exercise
three warrants (and issue three additional shares) to produce enough money (€15) to
acquire one share in the market. Thus, a net increase of two shares outstanding results.

--- Page 1283 ---
To see this computation using larger numbers, assume 1,500 options outstanding at an
exercise price of €30 for an ordinary share and a market price per ordinary share of €50.
Through application of the treasury-share method, the company would have 600
incremental shares outstanding, computed as shown in Illustration 16.27.17
Proceeds from exercise of 1,500 options (1,500 × €30)
€45,000
Shares issued upon exercise of options
1,500
Treasury shares purchasable with proceeds (€45,000 ÷ €50)
(900)
Incremental shares outstanding (potential ordinary shares)
600
ILLUSTRATION 16.27 Computation of Incremental Shares
Thus, if the exercise price of the option or warrant is lower than the market price of the
shares, dilution occurs. An exercise price of the option or warrant higher than the market
price of the shares reduces ordinary shares. In this case, the options or warrants are
antidilutive because their assumed exercise leads to an increase in earnings per share.
For both options and warrants, exercise is assumed only if the average market price of the
share exceeds the exercise price during the reported period.18 As a practical matter, a simple
average of the weekly or monthly prices is adequate, so long as the prices do not fluctuate
significantly.
Comprehensive Example—Treasury-Share Method
To illustrate application of the treasury-share method, assume that Kubitz Industries has
net income for the period of ₴220,000. The average number of shares outstanding for the
period was 100,000 shares. Hence, basic EPS—ignoring all dilutive securities—is ₴2.20. The
average number of shares related to options outstanding (although not exercisable at this
time), at an option price of ₴20 per share, is 5,000 shares. The average market price of the
ordinary shares during the year was ₴28. Illustration 16.28 shows the computation of
EPS using the treasury-share method.

--- Page 1284 ---
 
Basic
Earnings per
Share
Diluted
Earnings per
Share
Average number of shares related to options outstanding:
 
5,000
Option price per share
 
×
 ₴20
Proceeds upon exercise of options
 
₴100,000
Average market price of ordinary shares
 
₴28
Treasury shares that could be repurchased with proceeds
(₴100,000 ÷ ₴28)
 
3,571
Excess of shares under option over the treasury shares that
could be repurchased (5,000 − 3,571)—potential ordinary
incremental shares
 
1,429
Average number of ordinary shares outstanding
100,000
100,000
Total average number of ordinary shares outstanding and
potential ordinary shares
100,000 (A)
101,429 (C)
Net income for the year
₴220,000
(B)
₴220,000
(D)
Earnings per share
₴2.20 (B ÷
A) ₴2.17 (D ÷ C)
ILLUSTRATION 16.28 Computation of Earnings per Share—Treasury-Share
Method
Contingently Issuable Shares
Contingently issuable ordinary shares are defined as ordinary shares issuable for little
or no cash consideration upon satisfaction of specified conditions in a contingent share
agreement. For example, in business combinations, the acquirer may agree to issue
additional shares—contingently issuable shares—under certain circumstances. Companies
generally issue these contingent shares based on a measure such as attainment of a certain
earnings or market price level. The basic rule is that the number of contingent shares to be
included in diluted earnings per share is based on the number of shares that would be
issuable if the end of the period were the end of the contingency period.19 [11]
For example, assume that Watts Corporation purchases Cardoza SA in 2021 and agrees to
give Cardoza’s shareholders 20,000 additional shares in 2024 if Cardoza’s net income in
2023 is R$90,000. Here is what happens in the next two years:
1. In 2022, Cardoza’s net income is R$100,000. Cardoza therefore has met the net income
test in 2022 and should include the 20,000 shares in diluted earnings per share for
2022.
2. In 2023, Cardoza’s net income is R$80,000. Cardoza therefore does not meet the
earnings test in 2023 and should not include the shares in diluted earnings per share
in 2023.

--- Page 1285 ---
Because Cardoza’s earnings in 2022 may change in 2023, the calculation of basic EPS does
not include contingent shares until the end of the contingency period because not all
conditions have been satisfied.
Antidilution Revisited
In computing diluted EPS, a company must consider the aggregate of all dilutive securities.
But first it must determine which potentially dilutive securities are in fact individually
dilutive and which are antidilutive. A company should exclude any security that is
antidilutive, nor can the company use such a security to offset dilutive securities.
Recall that including antidilutive securities in earnings per share computations increases
earnings per share (or reduces net loss per share). With options or warrants, whenever the
exercise price exceeds the market price, the security is antidilutive. Convertible debt is
antidilutive if the addition to income of the interest (net of tax) causes a greater percentage
increase in income (numerator) than the conversion of the bonds causes a percentage
increase in ordinary and potentially dilutive shares (denominator). In other words,
convertible debt is antidilutive if conversion of the security causes ordinary share earnings
to increase by an amount per additional ordinary share that is greater than the amount of
earnings per share before the conversion.
To illustrate, assume that Martin Corporation has a $1,000,000 debt issue that is
convertible into 10,000 ordinary shares. Interest expense on the liability component of this
convertible bond is $60,000. Net income for the year is $210,000, the weighted-average
number of ordinary shares outstanding is 100,000 shares, and the tax rate is 40 percent. In
this case, assumed conversion of the debt into ordinary shares at the beginning of the year
requires the following adjustments of net income and the weighted-average number of
shares outstanding, as shown in Illustration 16.29.
Net income for the year
$210,000
Average number of shares
outstanding
100,000
Add: Adjustment for interest (net of tax)
on bonds $60,000 × (1 − .40)
36,000
Add: Shares issued upon
assumed conversion of debt
10,000
Adjusted net income
$246,000
Average number of ordinary
and potential ordinary shares
110,000
Basic EPS = $210,000 ÷ 100,000 = $2.10
Diluted EPS = $246,000 ÷ 110,000 = $2.24 = Antidilutive
ILLUSTRATION 16.29 Test for Antidilution
As a shortcut, Martin can also identify the convertible debt as antidilutive by comparing the
EPS resulting from conversion, $3.60 ($36,000 additional earnings ÷ 10,000 additional
shares), with EPS before inclusion of the convertible debt, $2.10.
Companies should ignore antidilutive securities in all calculations and in computing diluted
earnings per share. This approach is reasonable. The accounting profession’s intent was to
inform the investor of the possible dilution that might occur in reported earnings per share
and not to be concerned with securities that, if converted or exercised, would result in an
increase in earnings per share. Appendix 16B to this chapter provides an extended example
of how companies consider antidilution in a complex situation with multiple securities.

--- Page 1286 ---
EPS Presentation and Disclosure
A company should present both basic and diluted EPS information as shown in
Illustration 16.30.
Earnings per ordinary share  
Basic earnings per share
$3.30
Diluted earnings per share $2.70
ILLUSTRATION 16.30 EPS Presentation—Complex Capital Structure
When the earnings of a period include discontinued operations, a company should show per
share amounts for the following: income from continuing operations, discontinued
operations, and net income. Companies that report a discontinued operation should present
per share amounts for those line items either on the face of the income statement or in
the notes to the financial statements. Illustration 16.31 shows a presentation reporting
discontinued operations.
Basic earnings per share
 
Income from continuing operations $3.80
Discontinued operations (loss)
(0.80)
Net income
$3.00
Diluted earnings per share
 
Income from continuing operations $3.35
Discontinued operations (loss)
(0.65)
Net income
$2.70
ILLUSTRATION 16.31 EPS Presentation, with Discontinued Operations
The following information should also be disclosed.
1. The amounts used as the numerators in calculating basic and diluted earnings per
share, and a reconciliation of those amounts to net income or loss. The reconciliation
should include the individual effect of each class of instruments that affects earnings
per share.
2. The weighted-average ordinary shares used as the denominator in calculating basic and
diluted earnings per share, and a reconciliation of these denominators to each other.
The reconciliation should include the individual effect of each class of instruments that
affects earnings per share.
3. Instruments (including contingently issuable shares) that could potentially dilute basic
earnings per share in the future but were not included in the calculation of diluted
earnings per share because they are antidilutive for the period(s) presented.
4. A description of ordinary share transactions or potential ordinary share transactions
that occur after the reporting period and that would have significantly changed the
number of ordinary shares or potential ordinary shares outstanding at the end of the
period if those transactions had occurred before the end of the reporting period.

--- Page 1287 ---
Note that if the number of ordinary or potential ordinary shares outstanding increases as a
result of a share dividend or share split, or decreases as a result of diluted EPS calculations,
such changes in the number of shares should be disclosed (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
Providing additional EPS information in addition to the presentation on the face of the
income statement is an application of the full disclosure principle.
Illustration 16.32 presents the reconciliation and the related disclosure to meet the
requirements of this standard. [12]
ILLUSTRATION 16.32 Reconciliation for Basic and Diluted EPS
Summary of EPS Computation
Computation of earnings per share is a complex issue. It is also a controversial area because
many securities, although technically not ordinary shares, have many of their basic
characteristics. Indeed, some companies have issued these other securities rather than
ordinary shares in order to avoid an adverse dilutive effect on earnings per share.
Illustrations 16.33 and 16.34 display the elementary points of calculating earnings per
share in a simple capital structure and in a complex capital structure.

--- Page 1288 ---
ILLUSTRATION 16.33 Calculating EPS, Simple Capital Structure

--- Page 1289 ---
ILLUSTRATION 16.34 Calculating EPS, Complex Capital Structure
APPENDIX 16A 
Accounting for Share-Appreciation Rights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Explain the accounting for share-appreciation rights plans.
A major disadvantage of many share-option plans is that an executive must pay income tax
on the difference between the market price of the share and the option price at the date of
exercise. This feature of share-option plans (those referred to as non-qualified) could be
a financial hardship for an executive who wishes to keep the shares (rather than sell them
immediately) because he or she would have to pay not only income tax but the option price
as well. In another type of plan (an incentive plan), the executive pays no taxes at exercise
but may need to borrow to finance the exercise price, which leads to related interest cost.

--- Page 1290 ---
One solution to this problem was the creation of share-appreciation rights (SARs). In
this type of plan, the company gives an executive the right to receive compensation equal to
the share appreciation. Share appreciation is the excess of the market price of the shares
at the date of exercise over a pre-established price. The company may pay the share
appreciation in cash, shares, or a combination of the two.
The major advantage of SARs is that the executive often does not have to make a cash
outlay at the date of exercise but receives a payment for the share appreciation. Unlike
shares acquired under a share-option plan, the company does not issue the shares that
constitute the basis for computing the appreciation in a SARs plan. Rather, the company
simply awards the executive cash or shares having a fair value equivalent to the
appreciation. The accounting for share-appreciation rights depends on whether the
company classifies the rights as equity or as a liability.
SARs—Share-Based Equity Awards
Companies classify SARs as equity awards if at the date of exercise the holder receives
shares from the company upon exercise.20 In essence, SARs are essentially equivalent to a
share option. The major difference relates to the form of payment. With the share option,
the holder pays the exercise price and then receives the shares. In an equity SAR, the holder
receives shares in an amount equal to the share-price appreciation (the difference
between the market price and the pre-established price). The accounting for SARs when
they are equity awards follows the accounting used for share options. At the date of grant,
the company determines a fair value for the SAR and then allocates this amount to
compensation expense over the service period of the employees.
SARs—Share-Based Liability Awards
Companies classify SARs as liability awards if at the date of exercise the holder receives a
cash payment. In this case, the holder is not receiving additional shares but a cash payment
equal to the amount of share-price appreciation. The company’s compensation expense
therefore changes as the value of the liability changes.
A company uses the following approach to record share-based liability awards:
1. Measure the fair value of the award at the grant date and accrue compensation over the
service period.
2. Remeasure the fair value each reporting period until the award is settled; adjust the
compensation cost each period for changes in fair value prorated for the portion of the
service period completed.
3. Once the service period is completed, determine compensation expense each
subsequent period by reporting the full change in market price as an adjustment to
compensation expense.
For liability awards, the company estimates the fair value of the SARs using an option-
pricing model. The company then allocates this total estimated compensation cost over the
service period, recording expense (or a decrease in expense if fair value declines) in each
period. At the end of each period, total compensation expense reported to date should equal
the percentage of the total service period that has elapsed, multiplied by the total estimated
compensation cost.

--- Page 1291 ---
For example, assume that the service period is 40 percent complete, and total estimated
compensation is $100,000. The company reports cumulative compensation expense to date
of $40,000 ($100,000 × .40).
The method of allocating compensation expense is called the percentage approach. In
this method, in the first year of, say, a four-year plan, the company charges one-fourth of
the estimated cost to date. In the second year, it charges off two-fourths, or 50 percent, of
the estimated cost to date, less the amount already recognized in the first year. In the third
year, it charges off three-fourths of the estimated cost to date, less the amount recognized
previously. In the fourth year, it charges off the remaining compensation expense.
A special problem arises when the exercise date is past the service period. In the previous
example, if the share-appreciation rights were not exercised at the end of four years, in the
fifth year the company would have to account for the difference in the market price and the
pre-established price. In this case, the company adjusts compensation expense whenever a
change in the market price of the shares occurs in subsequent reporting periods until
the rights expire or are exercised, whichever comes first.
Increases or decreases in the fair value of the SAR between the date of grant and the
exercise date, therefore, result in a change in the measure of compensation. Some periods
will have credits to compensation expense if the fair value decreases from one period to the
next. The credit to compensation expense, however, cannot exceed previously recognized
compensation expense. In other words, cumulative compensation expense cannot be
negative.
Share-Appreciation Rights Example
Assume that Brazil Hotels, SA establishes a share-appreciation rights plan on January 1,
2022. The plan entitles executives to receive cash at the date of exercise for the difference
between the share’s market price and the pre-established price of R$10 on 10,000 SARs.
The fair value of the SARs on December 31, 2022, is R$3, and the service period runs for
two years (2022–2023). Illustration 16A.1 indicates the amount of compensation
expense to be recorded each period, assuming that the executives hold the SARs for three
years, at which time they exercise the rights.

--- Page 1292 ---
Share-Appreciation Rights 
Schedule of Compensation Expense
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
 
 
 
Date
Fair
Value
Cumulative
Compensation
Recognizablea
Percentage
Accruedb
Cumulative
Compensation
Accrued to
Date
Expense
2022
Expense
2023
Expense
2024
12/31/22
R$3
R$30,000
50%
R$ 15,000 R$15,000  
 
 
 
 
 
55,000  
R$55,000  
12/31/23
7
70,000
100%
70,000  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(20,000)  
 
R$(20,000)
12/31/24
5
50,000
100%
R$ 50,000  
 
 
aCumulative compensation for unexercised SARs to be allocated to periods of service.
bThe percentage accrued is based upon a 2-year service period (2022–2023).
ILLUSTRATION 16A.1 Compensation Expense, Share-Appreciation Rights
In 2022, Brazil Hotels records compensation expense of R$15,000 because 50 percent of
the R$30,000 total compensation cost estimated at December 31, 2022, is allocable to 2022.
In 2023, the fair value increased to R$7 per right (R$70,000 total). The company recorded
additional compensation expense of R$55,000 (R$70,000 minus R$15,000).
The executives held the SARs through 2024, during which time the fair value declined to
R$5 (and the obligation to the executives equals R$50,000). Brazil Hotels recognizes the
decrease by recording a R$20,000 credit to compensation expense and a debit to Liability
under Share-Appreciation Plan. Note that after the service period ends, since the rights are
still outstanding, the company adjusts the rights to market at December 31, 2024. Any such
credit to compensation expense cannot exceed previous charges to expense attributable to
that plan.
As the company records the compensation expense each period, the corresponding credit is
to a liability account, because the company will pay the share appreciation in cash. Brazil
Hotels records compensation expense in the first year as follows.
Compensation Expense
15,000  
Liability under Share-Appreciation Plan  
15,000
The company would credit the liability account for R$55,000 again in 2023. In 2024, when
it records negative compensation expense, Brazil would debit the account for R$20,000.
The entry to record the negative compensation expense is as follows.
Liability under Share-Appreciation Plan 20,000  
Compensation Expense
 
20,000
At December 31, 2024, the executives receive R$50,000 (which equals the market price of
the shares less the pre-established price). Brazil would remove the liability with the
following entry.

--- Page 1293 ---
Liability under Share-Appreciation Plan 50,000  
Cash
 
50,000
Compensation expense can increase or decrease substantially from one period to the next.
The reason is that compensation expense is remeasured each year, which can lead to large
swings in compensation expense.
APPENDIX 16B 
Comprehensive Earnings per Share Example
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *7
Compute earnings per share in a complex situation.
This appendix illustrates the method of computing dilution when many securities are
involved. In Illustration 16B.1, we present a section of the statement of financial position
of Webster Corporation for analysis. Assumptions related to the capital structure follow the
statement of financial position.

--- Page 1294 ---
Webster Corporation 
Statement of Financial Position (partial) 
At December 31, 2022
Equity
 
10% cumulative, convertible preference shares, par value $100; 100,000
shares authorized, 25,000 shares issued and outstanding
$ 2,500,000
Share capital—ordinary, par value $1,500,000 shares authorized, 500,000
shares issued and outstanding
500,000
Share premium
2,000,000
Retained earnings
9,000,000
Total equity
$14,000,000
Long-term debt
 
Notes payable, 14%
$ 1,000,000
Convertible bonds payable (Issue A)
2,500,000
Convertible bonds payable (Issue B)
2,500,000
Total long-term debt
$ 6,000,000
 
Notes and Assumptions 
December 31, 2022
1. Options were granted in July 2020 to purchase 50,000 ordinary shares at $20 per
share. The average market price of Webster’s ordinary shares during 2022 was $30 per
share. All options are still outstanding at the end of 2022.
2. Both convertible bonds were issued in 2021. Each convertible bond is convertible into
40 shares of ordinary shares. (Each bond has a face value of $1,000.) In 2022, interest
expense of $200,000 on the liability component of convertible bonds (Issue A) is
recorded, and interest expense of $250,000 is recorded on the liability component of
convertible bonds (Issue B).
3. The 10 percent cumulative, convertible preference shares were issued at the beginning
of 2022 at par. Each preference share is convertible into four ordinary shares.
4. The average income tax rate is 40 percent.
5. The 500,000 ordinary shares were outstanding during the entire year.
6. Preference dividends were not declared in 2022.
7. Net income was $1,750,000 in 2022.
8. No bonds or preference shares were converted during 2022.
ILLUSTRATION 16B.1 Statement of Financial Position for Comprehensive
Illustration

--- Page 1295 ---
The computation of basic earnings per share for 2022 starts with the amount based upon
the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding, as shown in Illustration 16B.2.
Net income
$1,750,000
Less: 10% cumulative, convertible preference share dividend requirements
250,000
Income applicable to ordinary shareholders
$1,500,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
500,000
Earnings per ordinary share
$3.00
ILLUSTRATION 16B.2 Computation of Earnings per Share—Simple Capital
Structure
Note the following points concerning this calculation.
1. When preference shares are cumulative, the company subtracts the preference
dividend to arrive at income applicable to ordinary shares, whether the dividend is
declared or not.
2. The company must compute earnings per share of $3 as a starting point because it is
the per share amount that is subject to reduction due to the existence of convertible
securities and options.
Diluted Earnings Per Share
The steps for computing diluted earnings per share are:
1. Determine, for each dilutive security, the per share effect assuming
exercise/conversion.
2. Rank the results from Step 1 from smallest to largest earnings effect per share. That is,
rank the results from most dilutive to least dilutive.
3. Beginning with the earnings per share based upon the weighted-average of ordinary
shares outstanding ($3), recalculate earnings per share by adding the smallest per
share effects from Step 2. If the results from this recalculation are less than $3,
proceed to the next smallest per share effect and recalculate earnings per share.
Continue this process so long as each recalculated earnings per share is smaller than
the previous amount. The process will end either because there are no more securities
to test or a particular security maintains or increases earnings per share (is
antidilutive).
We’ll now apply the three steps to Webster Corporation. (Note that net income and income
available to ordinary shareholders are not the same if preference dividends are declared or
cumulative.) Webster Corporation has four securities that could reduce EPS: options,
convertible bonds (Issue A), convertible bonds (Issue B), and the convertible preference
shares.
The first step in the computation of diluted earnings per share is to determine a per share
effect for each potentially dilutive security. Illustrations 16B.3 through 16B.6 illustrate
these computations.

--- Page 1296 ---
Number of shares under option
50,000
Option price per share
× $20
Proceeds upon assumed exercise of options
$1,000,000
Average 2022 market price of ordinary shares
$30
Treasury shares that could be acquired with proceeds ($1,000,000 ÷ $30)
33,333
Excess of shares under option over treasury shares that could be repurchased
(50,000 − 33,333)
16,667
Per share effect:
 
=
=
$0
ILLUSTRATION 16B.3 Per Share Effect of Options (Treasury-Share Method),
Diluted Earnings per Share
Interest expense on bonds (Issue A) for year
$200,000
Income tax reduction due to interest (.40 × $200,000)
80,000
Interest expense avoided (net of tax)
$120,000
Number of ordinary shares issued assuming conversion of bonds (2,500 bonds
× 40 shares)
100,000
Per share effect:
 
=
=
$1.20
ILLUSTRATION 16B.4 Per Share Effect of Issue A Bonds (If-Converted
Method), Diluted Earnings per Share
Interest expense on bonds (Issue B) for year
$250,000
Income tax reduction due to interest (.40 × $250,000)
100,000
Interest expense avoided (net of tax)
$150,000
Number of ordinary shares issued assuming conversion of bonds (2,500 bonds
× 40 shares)
100,000
Per share effect:
 
=
=
$1.50
ILLUSTRATION 16B.5 Per Share Effect of Issue B Bonds (If-Converted
Method), Diluted Earnings per Share
Incremental Numerator Effect
Incremental Denominator Effect
None
16, 667 shares
Incremental Numerator Effect
Incremental Denominator Effect
$120,000
100, 000 shares
Incremental Numerator Effect
Incremental Denominator Effect
$150,000
100, 000 shares

--- Page 1297 ---
Dividend requirement on cumulative preference share (25,000 shares × $10)
$250,000
Income tax effect (dividends not a tax deduction)
none
Dividend requirement avoided
$250,000
Number of ordinary shares issued assuming conversion of preference shares (4
× 25,000 shares)
100,000
Per share effect:
 
=
=
$2.50
ILLUSTRATION 16B.6 Per Share Effect of 10% Convertible Preference Shares
(If-Converted Method), Diluted Earnings per Share
Illustration 16B.7 shows the ranking of all four potentially dilutive securities.
 
Effect per Share
1. Options
$  0
2. Convertible bonds (Issue A)
1.20
3. Convertible bonds (Issue B)
1.50
4. 10% convertible preference
2.50
ILLUSTRATION 16B.7 Ranking of Per Share Effects (Smallest to Largest),
Diluted Earnings per Share
The next step is to determine earnings per share giving effect to the ranking in Illustration
16B.7. Starting with the earnings per share of $3 computed previously, add the incremental
effects of the options to the original calculation, as shown in Illustration 16B.8.
Options
Income applicable to ordinary shareholders
$1,500,000
Add: Incremental numerator effect of options
none
Total
$1,500,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
500,000
Add: Incremental denominator effect of options (Illustration 16B.3)
16,667
Total
516,667
Recomputed earnings per share ($1,500,000 ÷ 516,667 shares)
$2.90
ILLUSTRATION 16B.8 Recomputation of EPS Using Incremental Effect of
Options
Since the recomputed earnings per share is reduced (from $3 to $2.90), the effect of the
options is dilutive. Again, we could have anticipated this effect because the average market
price ($30) exceeded the option price ($20).
Assuming that Webster converts the bonds (Issue A), recomputed earnings per share is as
shown in Illustration 16B.9.
Incremental Numerator Effect
Incremental Denominator Effect
$250,000
100, 000 shares

--- Page 1298 ---
Convertible Bonds (Issue A)
Numerator from previous calculation
$1,500,000
Add: Interest expense avoided (net of tax)
120,000
Total
$1,620,000
Denominator from previous calculation (shares)
516,667
Add: Number of ordinary shares assumed issued upon conversion of bonds
100,000
Total
616,667
Recomputed earnings per share ($1,620,000 ÷ 616,667 shares)
$2.63
ILLUSTRATION 16B.9 Recomputation of EPS Using Incremental Effect of
Convertible Bonds (Issue A)
Since the recomputed earnings per share is reduced (from $2.90 to $2.63), the effect of the
bonds (Issue A) is dilutive.
Next, assuming Webster converts the bonds (Issue B), the company recomputes earnings
per share as shown in Illustration 16B.10.
Convertible Bonds (Issue B)
Numerator from previous calculation
$1,620,000
Add: Interest expense avoided (net of tax)
150,000
Total
$1,770,000
Denominator from previous calculation (shares)
616,667
Add: Number of ordinary shares assumed issued upon conversion of bonds
100,000
Total
716,667
Recomputed earnings per share ($1,770,000 ÷ 716,667 shares)
$2.47
ILLUSTRATION 16B.10 Recomputation of EPS Using Incremental Effect of
Convertible Bonds (Issue B)
Since the recomputed earnings per share is reduced (from $2.63 to $2.47), the effect of the
convertible bonds (Issue B) is dilutive.
The final step is the recomputation that includes the 10 percent preference shares. This is
shown in Illustration 16B.11.

--- Page 1299 ---
10% Convertible Preference
Numerator from previous calculation
$1,770,000
Add: Dividend requirement avoided
250,000
Total
$2,020,000
Denominator from previous calculation (shares)
716,667
Add: Number of ordinary shares assumed issued upon conversion of
preference shares
100,000
Total
816,667
Recomputed earnings per share ($2,020,000 ÷ 816,667 shares)
$2.47
ILLUSTRATION 16B.11 Recomputation of EPS Using Incremental Effect of
10% Convertible Preference Shares
Since the recomputed earnings per share is not reduced, the effect of the 10 percent
convertible preference shares are not dilutive. Diluted earnings per share is $2.47. The per
share effects of the preference shares are not used in the computation.
Finally, Illustration 16B.12 shows Webster Corporation’s disclosure of earnings per share
on its income statement.
Net income
$1,750,000
Basic earnings per ordinary share (Note X)
$3.00
Diluted earnings per ordinary share
$2.47
ILLUSTRATION 16B.12 Income Statement Presentation, EPS
A company uses income from continuing operations (adjusted for preference dividends) to
determine whether potential ordinary shares are dilutive or antidilutive. Some refer to this
measure as the control number. To illustrate, assume that Barton Company provides the
information as shown in Illustration 16B.13.
Income from continuing operations
$2,400,000
Loss from discontinued operations
3,600,000
Net loss
$1,200,000
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
1,000,000
Potential ordinary shares
200,000
ILLUSTRATION 16B.13 Barton Company Data
Barton reports basic and dilutive earnings per share as shown in Illustration 16B.14.

--- Page 1300 ---
Basic earnings per share
 
Income from continuing operations $2.40
Loss from discontinued operations
3.60
Net loss
$1.20
Diluted earnings per share
 
Income from continuing operations $2.00
Loss from discontinued operations
3.00
Net loss
$1.00
ILLUSTRATION 16B.14 Basic and Diluted EPS
As this shows, basic earnings per share from continuing operations is higher than the
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations. The reason: The diluted earnings
per share from continuing operations includes an additional 200,000 shares of potential
ordinary shares in its denominator.21
Companies use income from continuing operations as the control number because many of
them show income from continuing operations (or a similar line item above net income if it
appears on the income statement), but report a final net loss due to a loss on discontinued
operations. If a company uses final net loss as the control number, basic and diluted
earnings per share would be the same because the potential ordinary shares are
antidilutive.22
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
antidilutive securities
basic earnings per share (EPS)
complex capital structure
compound instrument
contingently issuable ordinary shares
*control number
convertible bonds
convertible preference shares
diluted earnings per share (EPS)
dilutive securities
earnings per share
fair value method
grant date
if-converted method

--- Page 1301 ---
income available to ordinary shareholders
induce conversion
intrinsic-value method
market condition
*percentage approach
restricted-share plans
service condition
service period
*share appreciation
*share-appreciation rights (SARs)
share-based compensation plans
share option
share right
share warrant
simple capital structure
treasury-share method
warrants
weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
“with-and-without” method
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the accounting for the issuance, conversion, and retirement of
convertible securities.
Convertible debt is accounted for as a compound instrument because it contains both a
liability and an equity component. IFRS requires that compound instruments be separated
into their liability and equity components for purposes of accounting. Companies use the
with-and-without method to value compound instruments. If companies convert bonds into
other securities, the principal accounting problem is to determine the amount at which to
record the securities exchanged for the bonds; the book value method is considered IFRS.
The retirement of convertible debt is considered a debt extinguishment, and the difference
between the carrying amount of the retired convertible debt and the cash paid should result
in a gain or loss.
When convertible preference shares are converted, a company uses the book value
approach. It debits Share Capital—Preference, along with the related Share Premium—
Conversion Equity, and credits Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium—Ordinary (if
any excess exists).

--- Page 1302 ---
2 Describe the accounting for share warrants and for share warrants issued
with other securities.
Share warrants: Companies should allocate the proceeds from the sale of debt with
warrants between the two securities using the with-and-without method. Share rights: No
entry is required when a company issues rights to existing shareholders. The company
needs only to make a memorandum entry to indicate the number of rights issued to
existing shareholders and to ensure that the company has additional unissued shares
registered for issuance in case the shareholders exercise the rights.
3 Describe the accounting and reporting for share compensation plans.
Companies must use the fair value approach to account for share-based compensation.
Under this approach, a company computes total compensation expense based on the fair
value of the options that it expects to vest on the grant date. Companies recognize
compensation expense in the periods in which the employee performs the services.
Restricted-share plans follow the same general accounting principles as those for share
options. Companies estimate total compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair
value of the restricted shares; they expense that cost over the service period.
When first proposed, there was considerable opposition to the recognition provisions
contained in the fair value approach. The reason: That approach could result in substantial,
previously unrecognized compensation expense. Many small companies believed that the
standard would place them at a competitive disadvantage with larger companies that can
withstand higher compensation charges. Offsetting such opposition is the need for greater
transparency in financial reporting, on which our capital markets depend.
4 Compute basic earnings per share.
When a company has both ordinary and preference shares outstanding, it subtracts the
current-year preference shares dividend from net income to arrive at income available to
ordinary shareholders. The formula for computing earnings per share is net income less
preference share dividends, divided by the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding.
5 Compute diluted earnings per share.
A complex capital structure requires a dual presentation of earnings per share, each with
equal prominence on the face of the income statement. These two presentations are
referred to as basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per share. Basic earnings per
share relies on the number of weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding (i.e.,
equivalent to EPS for a simple capital structure). Diluted earnings per share indicates the
dilution of earnings per share that will occur if all potential issuances of ordinary shares
that would reduce earnings per share takes place. Companies with complex capital
structures should exclude antidilutive securities when computing earnings per share.
*6 Explain the accounting for share-appreciation rights plans.

--- Page 1303 ---
The accounting for share-appreciation rights depends on whether the rights are classified as
equity- or liability-based. If equity-based, the accounting is similar to that used for share
options. If liability-based, companies remeasure compensation expense each period and
allocate it over the service period using the percentage approach.
*7 Compute earnings per share in a complex situation.
For diluted EPS, make the following computations. (1) For each potentially dilutive
security, determine the per share effect assuming exercise/conversion. (2) Rank the results
from most dilutive to least dilutive. (3) Recalculate EPS starting with the most dilutive and
continue adding securities until EPS does not change or becomes larger.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
On January 1, 2023, Scutaro Company issued 10-year, $200,000 face value, 6% bonds at
par (payable annually on January 1). Each $1,000 bond is convertible into 30 shares of
Scutaro $2 par value ordinary shares. The company has had 10,000 ordinary shares (and
no preference shares) outstanding throughout its life. None of the bonds have been
converted as of the end of 2024.
Scutaro also adopted a share-option plan that granted options to key executives to
purchase 4,000 shares of the company’s ordinary shares. The options were granted on
January 2, 2023, and were exercisable 2 years after the date of grant if the grantee was
still an employee of the company (the service period is 2 years). The options expire 6
years from the date of grant. The option price was set at $4, and the fair value option-
pricing model determines the total compensation expense to be $18,000. All of the
options were exercised during the year 2025: 3,000 on January 3 when the market price
was $6, and 1,000 on May 1 when the market price was $7 a share. (Ignore all tax effects.)
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry Scutaro would have made on January 1, 2023, to record the
issuance of the bonds. The fair value of the debt without a conversion option (with
an 8% effective rate) is $173,159.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record interest expense and compensation expense in
2024.
c. Scutaro’s net income was $30,000 in 2024, and $27,000 in 2023. Compute basic and
diluted earnings per share for Scutaro for 2024 and 2023. Scutaro’s average share
price was $4.40 in 2023 and $5 in 2024.
d. Assume that 75 percent of the holders of Scutaro’s convertible bonds convert their
bonds to shares on January 1, 2025, when Scutaro’s shares are trading at $8 per

--- Page 1304 ---
share. Scutaro pays $2 per bond to induce bondholders to convert. Prepare the
journal entry to record the conversion.
Solution
a. Under IFRS, proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt are recorded partly as debt
and partly as equity.
Cash
200,000  
Bonds Payable
 
173,159
Share Premium—Conversion Equity  
26,841
b. 
December 31, 2024
Interest Expense
14,001  
Interest Payable
 
12,000
Bonds Payable
 
2,001*
Compensation Expense
9,000  
Share premium—Share Options
 
9,000
[To record compensation expense for 2024 (½ × $18,000)]  
 
*Partial Amortization Schedule
Date Cash Paid Interest Expense (8%) Amortization Carrying Value
1/1/23
—
—
 
$173,159
1/1/24
$12,000
$13,853
$1,853
175,012
1/1/25
12,000
14,001
2,001
177,013
c. 
Basic EPS
2024
2023
Net income (a)
$30,000 $27,000
Outstanding shares (b)
10,000
10,000
Basic EPS (a ÷ b)
$  3.00 $  2.70
Diluted EPS
Net income
$30,000 $27,000
Add: Interest savings (see Partial Amortization Schedule above)
14,001
13,853
Adjusted net income (a)
$44,001 $40,853
Outstanding shares
10,000
10,000
Shares upon conversion (200 × 30)
6,000
6,000
Options (treasury-share method)
800*
364*
Total shares for diluted EPS (b)
16,800
16,364
Diluted EPS (a ÷ b)
$  2.62 $  2.50
*Treasury-share method:
 
2024
2023

--- Page 1305 ---
Cash proceeds
($4 × 4,000) $16,000  
$16,000
Shares repurchased ($16,000 ÷ $5)
3,200 ($16,000 ÷ $4.40)
3,636
Net shares issued
(4,000 − 3,200)
800
(4,000 − 3,636)
364
d. 
Bond Conversion Expense*
300  
Bonds Payable (.75 × $177,013)
132,760  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity ($26,841 × .75)
20,131  
Share Capital—Ordinary**
 
9,000
Share Premium—Ordinary**
 
143,891
Cash
 
300
*150 bonds × $2 per bond = $300 bond conversion expense
**$200,000 × .75 = $150,000 of bonds converted
$150,000 ÷ $1,000 per bond = 150 bonds
150 bonds × 30 shares per bond = 4,500 new shares issued
4,500 shares × $2 par value = $9,000 increase in share account
[($132,760 + $20,131) − $9,000] = $143,891 increase in share premium account
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendices
to the chapter.
Questions
1. What is meant by a dilutive security?
2. Briefly explain why companies issue convertible securities.
3. Discuss the similarities between convertible debt and debt issued with share warrants.
4. Bridgewater SA offered holders of its 1,000 convertible bonds a premium of €160 per
bond to induce conversion into ordinary shares. Upon conversion of all the bonds,
Bridgewater SA recorded the €160,000 premium as a reduction of Share Premium—
Ordinary. Comment on Bridgewater’s treatment of the €160,000 “sweetener.”
5. Explain how the conversion feature of convertible debt has a value (a) to the issuer and
(b) to the purchaser.
6. What are the arguments for giving separate accounting recognition to the conversion
feature of a convertible bond?
7. Four years after issue, debentures with a face value of £1,000,000 and book value of
£960,000 are tendered for conversion into 80,000 ordinary shares immediately after an
interest payment date. At that time, the market price of the debentures is 104, and the
ordinary shares are selling at £14 per share (par value £10). The company records the
conversion as follows.

--- Page 1306 ---
Bonds Payable
960,000  
Share Premium—Conversion Equity  
10,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
800,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
 
150,000
Discuss the propriety of this accounting treatment.
8. On July 1, 2022, Roberts AG issued €3,000,000 of 9% bonds payable in 20 years. The
bonds include warrants giving the bondholder the right to purchase for €30 one ordinary
share of €1 par value at any time during the next 10 years. The bonds were sold for
€3,000,000. The net present value of the debt at the time of issuance was €2,900,000.
Prepare the journal entry to record this transaction.
9. What are share rights? How does the issuing company account for them?
10. Briefly explain the accounting requirements for share compensation plans under IFRS.
11. Cordero Corporation has an employee share-purchase plan which permits all full-time
employees to purchase 10 ordinary shares on the third anniversary of their employment
and an additional 15 shares on each subsequent anniversary date. The purchase price is set
at the market price on the date purchased less a 10% discount. How is this discount
accounted for by Cordero?
12. What date or event does the profession believe should be used in determining the value
of a share compensation plan? What arguments support this position?
13. Over what period of time should compensation cost for a share-option plan be
allocated?
14. How is compensation expense for a share-option plan computed using the fair value
approach?
15. What are the advantages of using restricted shares to compensate employees?
16. At December 31, 2022, Ruiz SA had 600,000 ordinary shares issued and outstanding,
400,000 of which had been issued and outstanding throughout the year and 200,000 of
which were issued on October 1, 2022. Net income for 2022 was R$1,750,000, and
dividends declared on preference shares were R$400,000. Compute Ruiz’s earnings per
ordinary share.
17. What effect do share dividends or share splits have on the computation of the weighted-
average ordinary shares outstanding?
18. Define the following terms.
a. Basic earnings per share.
b. Potentially dilutive security.
c. Diluted earnings per share.
d. Complex capital structure.
e. Potential ordinary shares.

--- Page 1307 ---
19. What are the computational guidelines for determining whether a convertible security
is to be reported as part of diluted earnings per share?
20. Discuss why options and warrants may be considered potentially dilutive ordinary
shares for the computation of diluted earnings per share.
21. Explain how convertible securities are determined to be potentially dilutive ordinary
shares and how those convertible securities that are not considered to be potentially
dilutive ordinary shares enter into the determination of earnings per share data.
22. Explain the treasury-share method as it applies to options and warrants in computing
dilutive earnings per share data.
23. Earnings per share can affect market prices of ordinary shares. Can market prices affect
earnings per share? Explain.
24. What is meant by the term antidilution? Give an example.
25. What type of earnings per share presentation is required in a complex capital structure?
*26. How is antidilution determined when multiple securities are involved?
Brief Exercises
BE16.1 (LO 1) Archer plc issued £4,000,000 par value, 7% convertible bonds at 99 for
cash. The net present value of the debt without the conversion feature is £3,800,000.
Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the convertible bonds.
BE16.2 (LO 1) Petrenko SA has outstanding 2,000 €1,000 bonds, each convertible into 50
shares of €10 par value ordinary shares. The bonds are converted on December 31, 2022.
The bonds payable have a carrying value of €1,950,000, and there is conversion equity of
€20,000. Record the conversion using the book value method.
BE16.3 (LO 1) Pechstein Corporation issued 2,000 shares of $10 par value ordinary shares
upon conversion of 1,000 shares of $50 par value preference shares. The preference shares
were originally issued at $60 per share. The ordinary shares are trading at $26 per share at
the time of conversion. Record the conversion of the convertible preference shares.
BE16.4 (LO 2) Eisler Corporation issued 2,000 $1,000 bonds at 101. Each bond was issued
with one detachable share warrant. At issuance, the net present value of the bonds without
the warrants was $1,970,000. Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the bonds
and the share warrants.
BE16.5 (LO 2) Parsons SpA issued 3,000 €1,000 bonds at 98. Each bond was issued with
one detachable share warrant. At issuance, the net present value of the bonds without the
warrants was €2,910,000. Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the bonds and
the share warrants.
BE16.6 (LO 3) On January 1, 2022, Barwood Ltd. granted 5,000 options to executives.
Each option entitles the holder to purchase one share of Barwood’s £5 par value ordinary
shares at £50 per share at any time during the next 5 years. The market price of the shares
is £65 per share on the date of grant. The fair value of the options at the grant date is
£150,000. The period of benefit is 2 years. Prepare Barwood’s journal entries for January 1,
2022, and December 31, 2022 and 2023.

--- Page 1308 ---
BE16.7 (LO 3) Refer to the data for Barwood Ltd. in BE16.6. Repeat the requirements,
assuming that instead of options, Barwood granted 2,000 restricted shares.
BE16.8 (LO 3) On January 1, 2022 (the date of grant), Lutz Corporation issues 2,000
restricted shares to its executives. The fair value of these shares is $75,000, and their par
value is $10,000. The shares are forfeited if the executives do not complete 3 years of
employment with the company. Prepare the journal entry (if any) on January 1, 2022, and
on December 31, 2022, assuming the service period is 3 years.
BE16.9 (LO 4) Kalin AG had 2022 net income of €1,000,000. During 2022, Kalin paid a
dividend of €2 per share on 100,000 preference shares. During 2022, Kalin had outstanding
250,000 ordinary shares. Compute Kalin’s 2022 earnings per share.
BE16.10 (LO 4) Douglas Corporation had 120,000 ordinary shares outstanding on
January 1, 2022. On May 1, 2022, Douglas issued 60,000 ordinary shares. On July 1,
Douglas purchased 10,000 treasury shares, which were reissued on October 1. Compute
Douglas’s weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding for 2022.
BE16.11 (LO 4) Tomba Group had 300,000 ordinary shares outstanding on January 1,
2022. On May 1, Tomba issued 30,000 ordinary shares. (a) Compute the weighted-average
ordinary shares outstanding if the 30,000 shares were issued for cash. (b) Compute the
weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding if the 30,000 shares were issued in a share
dividend.
BE16.12 (LO 5) Rockland SA reported net income of R$300,000 in 2022 and had 100,000
ordinary shares outstanding throughout the year. Also outstanding all year was R$800,000
of 10% bonds, which are convertible into 16,000 ordinary shares. The interest expense on
the liability component of the convertible bonds was R$64,000. Rockland’s tax rate is 40%.
Compute Rockland’s 2022 diluted earnings per share.
BE16.13 (LO 5) DiCenta AG reported net income of €270,000 in 2022 and had 50,000
ordinary shares outstanding throughout the year. Also outstanding all year were 5,000
shares of cumulative preference shares, each convertible into 2 ordinary shares. The
preference shares pay an annual dividend of €5 per share. DiCenta’s tax rate is 40%.
Compute DiCenta’s 2022 diluted earnings per share.
BE16.14 (LO 5) Bedard Ltd. reported net income of 300,000 in 2022 and had 200,000
ordinary shares outstanding throughout the year. Also outstanding all year were 45,000
options to purchase ordinary shares at 10 per share. The average market price of the shares
during the year was 15. Compute diluted earnings per share.
BE16.15 (LO 4) The 2022 income statement of Wasmeier SE showed net income of
€480,000 and a loss from discontinued operations of €120,000. Wasmeier had 100,000
shares of ordinary shares outstanding all year. Prepare Wasmeier’s income statement
presentation of earnings per share.
*BE16.16 (LO 6) Ferraro, Inc. established a share-appreciation rights (SARs) program on
January 1, 2022, which entitles executives to receive cash at the date of exercise for the
difference between the market price of the shares and the pre-established price of $20 on
5,000 SARs. The required service period is 2 years. The fair value of the SARs is determined
to be $4 on December 31, 2022, and $9 on December 31, 2023. Compute Ferraro’s
compensation expense for 2022 and 2023.

--- Page 1309 ---
Exercises
E16.1 (LO 1) (Issuance and Repurchase of Convertible Bonds) Angela AG issues
2,000 convertible bonds at January 1, 2022. The bonds have a 3-year life and are issued at
par with a face value of €1,000 per bond, giving total proceeds of €2,000,000. Interest is
payable annually at 6%. Each bond is convertible into 250 ordinary shares (par value of €1).
When the bonds are issued, the market rate of interest for similar debt without the
conversion option is 8%.
Instructions
a. Compute the liability and equity component of the convertible bond on January 1,
2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the convertible bond on January 1,
2022.
c. Prepare the journal entry to record the repurchase of the convertible bond for cash at
January 1, 2025, its maturity date.
E16.2 (LO 1) (Issuance and Repurchase of Convertible Bonds) Assume the same
information in E16.1, except that Angela AG converts its convertible bonds on January 1,
2023.
Instructions
a. Compute the carrying value of the bond payable on January 1, 2023.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record the conversion on January 1, 2023.
c. Assume that the bonds were repurchased on January 1, 2023, for €1,940,000 cash
instead of being converted. The net present value of the liability component of the
convertible bonds on January 1, 2023, is €1,900,000. Prepare the journal entry to
record the repurchase on January 1, 2023.
E16.3 (LO 1) (Issuance and Repurchase of Convertible Bonds) On January 1, 2022,
Cai Ltd. issued a 10% convertible bond at par, with a face value of ¥100,000, maturing on
January 1, 2032 (amounts in thousands). The bond is convertible into ordinary shares of
Cai at a conversion price of ¥2,500 per share. Interest is payable annually. At date of issue,
Cai could have issued at par non-convertible debt with a 10-year term bearing an interest
rate of 11%.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the convertible debt on January 1,
2022.
b. On January 1, 2025, Cai makes a tender offer to the holder of the convertible debt to
repurchase the bond for ¥112,000, which the holder accepts. At the date of repurchase,
Cai could have issued non-convertible debt with a 7-year term at an effective-interest
rate of 8%. Prepare the journal entry to record this repurchase on January 1, 2025.

--- Page 1310 ---
E16.4 (LO 1) (Issuance, Conversion, Repurchase of Convertible Bonds) On
January 1, 2022, Lin plc issued a convertible bond with a par value of £50,000 in the market
for £60,000. The bonds are convertible into 6,000 ordinary shares of £1 per share par value.
The bond has a 5-year life and has a stated interest rate of 10% payable annually. The
market interest rate for a similar non-convertible bond at January 1, 2022, is 8%. The
liability component of the bond is computed to be £53,993. The following bond
amortization schedule is provided for this bond.
Effective-Interest Method 
10% Bond Discounted At 8%
Date
Cash Paid Interest Expense Premium Amortized Carrying Amount of Bonds
1/1/22
 
 
 
£53,993
12/31/22
£5,000
£4,319
£681
53,312
12/31/23
5,000
4,265
735
52,577
12/31/24
5,000
4,206
794
51,783
12/31/25
5,000
4,143
857
50,926
12/31/26
5,000
4,074
926
50,000
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the issuance of the convertible bond on January 1,
2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record the payment of interest on December 31, 2023.
c. Assume that the bonds were converted on December 31, 2024. The fair value of the
liability component of the bond is determined to be £54,000 on December 31, 2024.
Prepare the journal entry to record the conversion on December 31, 2024. Assume that
the accrual of interest related to 2024 has been recorded.
d. Assume that the convertible bonds were repurchased on December 31, 2024, for
£55,500 instead of being converted. As indicated, the liability component of the bond is
determined to be £54,000 on December 31, 2024. Assume that the accrual of interest
related to 2024 has been recorded.
e. Assume that the bonds matured on December 31, 2026, and Lin repurchased the bonds.
Prepare the entry or entries to record this transaction.
E16.5 (LO 1) (Conversion of Bonds) Schuss SA issued €3,000,000 of 10%, 10-year
convertible bonds on April 1, 2022, at 98. The bonds were dated April 1, 2022, with interest
payable April 1 and October 1. Bond discount is amortized semiannually using the effective-
interest method. The net present value of the bonds without the conversion feature
discounted at 12% (its market rate) was €2,655,888.
On April 1, 2023, €1,000,000 of these bonds were converted into 30,000 shares of €20 par
value ordinary shares. Accrued interest was paid in cash at the time of conversion.
Instructions
a. Prepare the entry to record the issuance of the convertible bond on April 1, 2022.

--- Page 1311 ---
b. Prepare the entry to record the interest expense at October 1, 2022.
c. Prepare the entry or entries to record the conversion on April 1, 2023. (The book value
method is used.)
E16.6 (LO 1) (Conversion of Bonds) Gabel Company has bonds payable outstanding
with a carrying value of $406,000. When issued, Gabel recorded $3,500 of conversion
equity. Each of the 400 $1,000 bonds is convertible into 20 ordinary shares with par value
of $50 per share. All bonds are converted into ordinary shares.
Instructions
Assuming that the book value method was used, what entry would be made?
E16.7 (LO 1, 2) (Issuance and Conversion of Bonds) For each of the unrelated
transactions described below, present the entry or entries required to record each
transaction.
1. Coyle SA issued €10,000,000 par value 10% convertible bonds at 99. If the bonds had
not been convertible, the company’s investment banker determines that they would
have been sold at 95.
2. Lambert AG issued €10,000,000 par value 10% bonds at 98. One share warrant was
issued with each €100 par value bond. The net present value of the bonds without the
warrants was €9,600,000.
3. Sepracor AG called its convertible debt in 2022. Assume the following related to the
transaction. The 11%, €10,000,000 par value bonds were converted into 1,000,000
shares of €1 par value ordinary shares on July 1, 2022. The carrying amount of the debt
on July 1 was €9,700,000. The Share Premium—Conversion Equity account had a
balance of €200,000, and the company paid an additional €75,000 to the bondholders
to induce conversion of all the bonds. The company records the conversion using the
book value method.
E16.8 (LO 2) (Issuance of Bonds with Share Warrants) Sun Ltd. has decided to raise
additional capital by issuing HK$175,000 face value of bonds with a coupon rate of 10%. In
discussions with investment bankers, it was determined that to help the sale of the bonds,
share warrants should be issued at the rate of one warrant for each HK$100 bond sold. The
fair value of the bonds without the warrants is HK$136,000. The proceeds upon issuance of
the bonds and warrants was HK$150,000.
Instructions
a. What entry should be made at the time of the issuance of the bonds and warrants?
b. If the warrants were non-detachable, would the entries be different? Discuss.
E16.9 (LO 2) (Issuance of Bonds with Share Warrants) On September 1, 2022,
Tokachi Group sold at 104 (plus accrued interest) 30,000 of its 8%, 10-year, ¥10,000 face
value, non-convertible bonds with detachable share warrants. Each bond carried two
detachable warrants. Each warrant was for one ordinary share at a specified option price of
¥1,500 per share. The net present value of bonds is determined to be ¥290,000,000.
Interest is payable on December 1 and June 1.

--- Page 1312 ---
Instructions
Prepare in general journal format the entry to record the issuance of the bonds.
E16.10 (LO 2) (Issuance of Bonds with Share Warrants) On May 1, 2022, Barkley SA
issued 3,000 €1,000 bonds at 102. Each bond was issued with one detachable share
warrant. The fair value of the bonds on May 1, 2022, was €2,940,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the entry to record the issuance of the bonds and warrants.
b. Assume the same facts as part (a), except that the warrants had an estimated fair value
of €25. Prepare the entry to record the issuance of the bonds and warrants.
E16.11 (LO 3) (Issuance and Exercise of Share Options) On November 1, 2021,
Olympic plc adopted a share-option plan that granted options to key executives to purchase
40,000 shares of the company’s £10 par value ordinary shares. The options were granted on
January 2, 2022, and were vested 2 years after the date of grant if the grantee was still an
employee of the company. The options expired 6 years from date of grant. The option price
was set at £40, and the fair value option-pricing model determines the total compensation
expense to be £600,000.
All of the options were exercised during the year 2024: 30,000 on January 3 when the
market price was £67, and 10,000 on May 1 when the market price was £77 a share.
Instructions
Prepare journal entries relating to the share-option plan for the years 2022, 2023, and 2024.
Assume that the employees perform services equally in 2022 and 2023.
E16.12 (LO 3) (Issuance, Exercise, and Forfeiture of Share Options) On January 1,
2022, Magilla SA granted share options to officers and key employees for the purchase of
20,000 of the company’s €10 par ordinary shares at €25 per share. The options were
exercisable by grantees still in the employ of the company within a 5-year period, beginning
January 1, 2024, and ending December 31, 2028. The service period for this award is 2
years. Assume that the fair value option-pricing model determines total compensation
expense to be €400,000.
On April 1, 2023, 3,000 options were forfeited when the employees resigned from the
company. The market price of the ordinary shares was €35 per share on this date.
On March 31, 2024, 12,000 options were exercised when the market price of the ordinary
shares was €40 per share.
Instructions
Prepare journal entries to record issuance of the share options, forfeiture of the share
options, exercise of the share options, and charges to compensation expense, for the years
ended December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024.
E16.13 (LO 3) (Issuance, Exercise, and Expiration of Share Options) On January 1,
2021, Tsang Ltd. granted 10,000 options to key executives. Each option allows the executive
to purchase one share of Tsang’s HK$5 par value ordinary shares at a price of HK$20 per
share. The options were exercisable within a 2-year period beginning January 1, 2023, if the
grantee was still employed by the company at the time of the exercise (the service period is

--- Page 1313 ---
2 years). On the grant date, Tsang’s shares were trading at HK$25 per share, and a fair value
option-pricing model determines total compensation to be HK$450,000.
On May 1, 2023, 9,000 options were exercised when the market price of Tsang’s shares
were HK$30 per share. The remaining options lapsed in 2025 because executives decided
not to exercise their options.
Instructions
Prepare the necessary journal entries related to the share-option plan for the years 2021
through 2025.
E16.14 (LO 3) (Accounting for Restricted Shares) Derrick plc issues 4,000 restricted
shares to its CFO, Dane Yaping, on January 1, 2022. The shares have a fair value of
£120,000 on this date. The service period related to these restricted shares is 4 years.
Vesting occurs if Yaping stays with the company for 4 years. The par value of the shares is
£5. At December 31, 2023, the fair value of the shares is £145,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record the restricted shares on January 1, 2022 (the date
of grant), and December 31, 2023.
b. On March 4, 2024, Yaping leaves the company. Prepare the journal entry (if any) to
account for this forfeiture.
E16.15 (LO 3) (Accounting for Restricted Shares) Lopez SpA issues 10,000 restricted
shares to its CFO, Juan Carlos, on January 1, 2022. The shares have a fair value of
€500,000 on this date. The service period related to the restricted shares is 5 years. Vesting
occurs if Carlos stays with the company for 6 years. The par value of the shares is €10. At
December 31, 2022, the fair value of the shares is €450,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record the restricted shares on January 1, 2022 (the date
of grant), and December 31, 2023.
b. On January 1, 2027, Carlos leaves the company. Prepare the journal entry (if any) to
account for this forfeiture.
E16.16 (LO 4) (Weighted-Average Ordinary Shares) Portillo SA uses a calendar year
for financial reporting. The company is authorized to issue 9,000,000 R$10 par ordinary
shares. At no time has Portillo issued any potentially dilutive securities. Listed below is a
summary of Portillo’s ordinary share activities.
1. Number of ordinary shares issued and outstanding at December 31, 2021
2,400,000
2. Shares issued as a result of a 10% share dividend on September 30, 2022
240,000
3. Shares issued for cash on March 31, 2023
2,000,000
Number of ordinary shares issued and outstanding at December 31, 2023
4,640,000
4. A 2-for-1 share split of Portillo’s ordinary shares took place on March 31,
2024
 
Instructions

--- Page 1314 ---
a. Compute the weighted-average ordinary shares used in computing earnings per
ordinary share for 2022 on the 2023 comparative income statement.
b. Compute the weighted-average ordinary shares used in computing earnings per
ordinary share for 2023 on the 2023 comparative income statement.
c. Compute the weighted-average ordinary shares to be used in computing earnings per
ordinary share for 2023 on the 2024 comparative income statement.
d. Compute the weighted-average ordinary shares to be used in computing earnings per
ordinary share for 2024 on the 2024 comparative income statement.
E16.17 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) On January 1, 2022, Chang Ltd. had
480,000 ordinary shares outstanding. During 2022, it had the following transactions that
affected the ordinary share account.
February 1 Issued 120,000 shares
March 1
Issued a 20% share dividend
May 1
Acquired 100,000 treasury shares
June 1
Issued a 3-for-1 share split
October 1
Reissued 60,000 treasury shares
Instructions
a. Determine the weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding for 2022.
b. Assume that Chang Ltd. earned net income of ¥3,256,000,000 during 2022. In
addition, it had 100,000 shares of 9%, ¥100 par, non-convertible, non-cumulative
preference shares outstanding for the entire year. Because of liquidity considerations,
however, the company did not declare and pay a preference dividend in 2022. Compute
earnings per share for 2022, using the weighted-average ordinary shares determined in
part (a).
c. Assume the same facts as in part (b), except that the preference shares were
cumulative. Compute earnings per share for 2022.
d. Assume the same facts as in part (b), except that net income included a loss from
discontinued operations of ¥432,000,000. The loss from discontinued operations is net
of applicable income taxes. Compute earnings per share for 2022.
E16.18 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) Ott Company had 210,000 ordinary
shares outstanding on December 31, 2022. During the year 2023, the company issued 8,000
shares on May 1 and retired 14,000 shares on October 31. For the year 2023, Ott Company
reported net income of £229,690 after a loss on discontinued operations of £40,600 (net of
tax).
Instructions
What earnings per share data should be reported at the bottom of its income statement?
E16.19 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) Huang Ltd. presented the following
data (yen in thousands).
Net income
¥2,200,000

--- Page 1315 ---
Preference shares: 50,000 shares outstanding, ¥100 par, 8% cumulative, not
convertible
5,000,000
Ordinary shares: Shares outstanding 1/1
600,000
Issued for cash, 5/1
300,000
Acquired treasury shares for cash, 8/1
150,000
2-for-1 share split, 10/1
 
Instructions
Compute earnings per share.
E16.20 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) A portion of the statement of income
and retained earnings of Pierson Inc. for the current year follows.
Income from continuing operations
 
$15,000,000
Loss on discontinued operations, net of applicable income tax
(Note 1)
 
1,340,000
Net income
 
13,660,000
Retained earnings at the beginning of the year
 
83,250,000
 
 
96,910,000
Dividends declared:
 
 
On preference shares—$6.00 per share
$
300,000
 
On ordinary shares—$1.75 per share
14,875,000
15,175,000
Retained earnings at the end of the year
 
$81,735,000
Note 1. During the year, Pierson Inc. had a loss from discontinued operations of
$1,340,000 after applicable income tax reduction of $1,200,000.
At the end of the current year, Pierson Inc. has outstanding 8,000,000 shares of $10 par
ordinary shares and 50,000 shares of 6% preference shares.
On April 1 of the current year, Pierson Inc. issued 1,000,000 ordinary shares for $32 per
share to help recover from the loss on discontinued operations.
Instructions
Compute the earnings per share on ordinary shares for the current year as it should be
reported to shareholders.
E16.21 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) On January 1, 2022, Bailey Industries
had shares outstanding as follows.
6% cumulative preference shares, €100 par value, issued and outstanding
10,000 shares
€1,000,000
Ordinary shares €10 par value, issued and outstanding 200,000 shares
2,000,000
To acquire the net assets of three smaller companies, Bailey authorized the issuance of an
additional 170,000 ordinary shares. The acquisitions took place as shown below.

--- Page 1316 ---
Date of Acquisition
Shares Issued
Company A: April 1, 2022
60,000
Company B: July 1, 2022
80,000
Company C: October 1, 2022
30,000
On May 14, 2022, Bailey realized a €90,000 (before taxes) gain from discontinued
operations. On December 31, 2022, Bailey recorded net income of €300,000 before tax and
exclusive of the gain.
Instructions
Assuming a 40% tax rate, compute the earnings per share data that should appear on the
financial statements of Bailey Industries as of December 31, 2022.
E16.22 (LO 4) (EPS: Simple Capital Structure) At January 1, 2022, Cameron
Company’s outstanding shares included the following.
280,000 shares of R$50 par value, 7% cumulative preference shares
800,000 shares of R$1 par value ordinary shares
Net income for 2022 was R$2,830,000. No cash dividends were declared or paid during
2022. On February 15, 2023, however, all preference dividends in arrears were paid,
together with a 5% share dividend on ordinary shares. There were no dividends in arrears
prior to 2022.
On April 1, 2022, 450,000 ordinary shares were sold for R$10 per share. On October 1,
2022, 110,000 ordinary shares were purchased for R$20 per share and held as treasury
shares.
Instructions
Compute earnings per share for 2022. Assume that financial statements for 2022 were
issued in March 2023.
E16.23 (LO 5) (EPS with Convertible Bonds, Various Situations) In 2022, Buraka
Enterprises issued, at par, 75 1,000, 8% bonds, each convertible into 100 ordinary shares.
The liability component of convertible bonds was 950 per bond, based on a market rate of
interest of 10%. Buraka had revenues of 17,500 and expenses other than interest and taxes
of 8,400 for 2023. (Assume that the tax rate is 40%.) Throughout 2023, 2,000 ordinary
shares were outstanding; none of the bonds was converted or redeemed.
Instructions
a. Compute diluted earnings per share for 2023.
b. Assume the same facts as those assumed for part (a), except that the 75 bonds were
issued on September 1, 2023 (rather than in 2022), and none have been converted or
redeemed.
c. Assume the same facts as assumed for part (a) except that 25 of the 75 bonds were
actually converted on July 1, 2023.
E16.24 (LO 5) (EPS with Convertible Bonds) On June 1, 2021, Bluhm Company and
Amanar Company merged to form Davenport SA. A total of 800,000 shares were issued to

--- Page 1317 ---
complete the merger. The new company reports on a calendar-year basis.
On April 1, 2023, the company issued an additional 600,000 shares for cash. All 1,400,000
shares were outstanding on December 31, 2023.
Davenport SA also issued €600,000 of 20-year, 8% convertible bonds at par on July 1, 2023.
Each €1,000 bond converts to 40 ordinary shares at any interest date. None of the bonds
have been converted to date. The interest expense on the liability component of convertible
bonds for 2023 was €30,000.
Davenport SA is preparing its annual report for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2023.
The annual report will show earnings per share figures based upon a reported after-tax net
income of €1,540,000. (The tax rate is 40%.)
Instructions
Determine the following for 2023.
a. The number of shares to be used for calculating:
1. Basic earnings per share.
2. Diluted earnings per share.
b. The earnings figures to be used for calculating:
1. Basic earnings per share.
2. Diluted earnings per share.
E16.25 (LO 1, 5) (EPS with Convertible Bonds and Preference Shares) The Ottey
Corporation issued 10-year, $4,000,000 par, 7% callable convertible subordinated
debentures on January 2, 2022. The bonds have a par value of $1,000, with interest payable
annually. The interest expense recorded on the liability component of the convertible bond
for 2022 was $320,000. The current conversion ratio is 14:1, and in 2 years it will increase
to 18:1. At the date of issue, the bonds were sold at 98. Ottey’s effective tax was 35%. Net
income in 2022 was $7,500,000, and the company had 2,000,000 shares outstanding
during the entire year.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule to compute both basic and diluted earnings per share.
b. Discuss how the schedule would differ if the security was convertible preference
shares.
E16.26 (LO 1, 5) (EPS with Convertible Bonds and Preference Shares) On January
1, 2022, Lund SA issued 10-year, €3,000,000 face value, 6% bonds, at par. Each €1,000
bond is convertible into 15 ordinary shares of Lund. Lund’s net income in 2023 was
€240,000, and its tax rate was 40%. Interest expense on the liability component in 2023
was €210,000. The company had 100,000 ordinary shares outstanding throughout 2022.
None of the bonds were converted in 2022.
Instructions
a. Compute diluted earnings per share for 2022.

--- Page 1318 ---
b. Compute diluted earnings per share for 2022, assuming the same facts as above, except
that €1,000,000 of 6% convertible preference shares were issued instead of the bonds.
Each €100 preference share is convertible into 5 ordinary shares of Lund.
E16.27 (LO 5) (EPS with Options, Various Situations) Zambrano plc net income for
2022 is £40,000. The only potentially dilutive securities outstanding were 1,000 options
issued during 2021, each exercisable for one share at £8. None has been exercised, and
10,000 ordinary shares were outstanding during 2022. The average market price of
Zambrano’s shares during 2022 was £20.
Instructions
a. Compute diluted earnings per share. (Round to two decimal places.)
b. Assume the same facts as those assumed for part (a), except that the 1,000 options
were issued on October 1, 2022 (rather than in 2021). The average market price during
the last 3 months of 2022 was £20.
E16.28 (LO 5) (EPS with Contingent Issuance Agreement) Brooks Inc. recently
purchased Donovan Corp., a large midwestern home painting company. One of the terms of
the merger was that if Donovan’s income for 2023 was $110,000 or more, 10,000 additional
shares would be issued to Donovan’s shareholders in 2024. Donovan’s income for 2022 was
$125,000.
Instructions
a. Would the contingent shares have to be considered in Brooks’ 2022 earnings per share
computations?
b. Assume the same facts, except that the 10,000 shares are contingent on Donovan’s
achieving a net income of $130,000 in 2023. Would the contingent shares have to be
considered in Brooks’ earnings per share computations for 2022?
E16.29 (LO 5) (EPS with Warrants) Werth AG earned €260,000 during a period when
it had an average of 100,000 ordinary shares outstanding. The ordinary shares sold at an
average market price of €15 per share during the period. Also outstanding were 30,000
warrants that could be exercised to purchase one ordinary share for €10 for each warrant
exercised.
Instructions
a. Are the warrants dilutive?
b. Compute basic earnings per share.
c. Compute diluted earnings per share.
*E16.30 (LO 6) (Share-Appreciation Rights) On December 31, 2019, Flessel plc issues
120,000 share-appreciation rights to its officers entitling them to receive cash for the
difference between the market price of its shares and a pre-established price of £10. The fair
value of the SARs is estimated to be £4 per SAR on December 31, 2020; £1 on December 31,
2021; £11 on December 31, 2022; and £9 on December 31, 2023. The service period is 4
years, and the exercise period is 7 years.

--- Page 1319 ---
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule that shows the amount of compensation expense allocable to each
year affected by the share-appreciation rights plan.
b. Prepare the entry at December 31, 2023, to record compensation expense, if any, in
2023.
c. Prepare the entry on December 31, 2023, assuming that all 120,000 SARs are exercised.
*E16.31 (LO 6) (Share-Appreciation Rights) Dominquez SA establishes a share-
appreciation rights program that entitles its new president Dan Scott to receive cash for the
difference between the market price of the shares and a pre-established price of R$30 (also
market price) on December 31, 2020, on 40,000 SARs. The date of grant is December 31,
2020, and the required employment (service) period is 4 years. Scott exercises all of the
SARs in 2026. The fair value of the SARs is estimated to be R$6 per SAR on December 31,
2021; R$9 on December 31, 2022; R$15 on December 31, 2023; R$8 on December 31, 2024;
and R$18 on December 31, 2025.
Instructions
a. Prepare a 5-year (2021–2025) schedule of compensation expense pertaining to the
40,000 SARs granted to Scott.
b. Prepare the journal entry for compensation expense in 2021, 2024, and 2025 relative to
the 40,000 SARs.
Problems
P16.1 (LO 1, 2, 3) 
 (Entries for Various Dilutive Securities) The equity
section of Martino AG at the beginning of the current year appears below.
Share capital—ordinary, €10 par value, authorized 1,000,000 shares, 300,000
shares issued and outstanding
€3,000,000
Share premium—ordinary
600,000
Retained earnings
570,000
During the current year, the following transactions occurred.
1. The company issued to the shareholders 100,000 rights. Ten rights are needed to buy
one share at €32. The rights were void after 30 days. The market price of the shares at
this time was €34 per share.
2. The company sold to the public a €200,000, 10% bond issue at 104. The company also
issued with each €100 bond one detachable share-purchase warrant, which provided
for the purchase of ordinary shares at €30 per share. The net present value of the
bonds without the warrants was €192,000.
3. All but 5,000 of the rights issued in (1) were exercised in 30 days.
4. At the end of the year, 80% of the warrants in (2) had been exercised, and the
remaining were outstanding and in good standing.

--- Page 1320 ---
5. During the current year, the company granted share options for 10,000 ordinary shares
to company executives. Using a fair value option-pricing model, the company
determines that each option is worth €10. The option price is €30. The options were to
expire at year-end and were considered compensation for the current year.
6. All but 1,000 shares related to the share-option plan were exercised by year-end. The
expiration resulted because one of the executives failed to fulfill an obligation related
to the employment contract.
Instructions
a. Prepare general journal entries for the current year to record the transactions listed
above.
b. Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position at the end of the
current year. Assume that retained earnings at the end of the current year is €750,000.
P16.2 (LO 3) (Share-Option Plan) Berg Company adopted a share-option plan on
November 30, 2021, that provided that 70,000 shares of $5 par value ordinary shares be
designated as available for the granting of options to officers of the company at a price of $9
a share. The market price was $12 a share on November 30, 2021.
On January 2, 2022, options to purchase 28,000 shares were granted to president Tom
Winter—15,000 for services to be rendered in 2022 and 13,000 for services to be rendered
in 2023. Also on that date, options to purchase 14,000 shares were granted to vice president
Michelle Bennett—7,000 for services to be rendered in 2022 and 7,000 for services to be
rendered in 2023. The market price of the shares was $14 a share on January 2, 2022. The
options were exercisable for a period of 1 year following the year in which the services were
rendered. The fair value of the options on the grant date was $4 per option.
In 2023, neither the president nor the vice president exercised their options because the
market price of the shares was below the exercise price. The market price was $8 a share on
December 31, 2023, when the options for 2022 services lapsed.
On December 31, 2024, both Winter and Bennett exercised their options for 13,000 and
7,000 shares, respectively, when the market price was $16 a share.
Instructions
Prepare the necessary journal entries in 2021 when the share-option plan was adopted, in
2022 when options were granted, in 2023 when options lapsed, and in 2024 when options
were exercised.
P16.3 (LO 3) (Share-Based Compensation) Assume that Sarazan SA has a share-
option plan for top management. Each share option represents the right to purchase a R$1
par value ordinary share in the future at a price equal to the fair value of the shares at the
date of the grant. Sarazan has 5,000 share options outstanding, which were granted at the
beginning of 2022. The following data relate to the option grant.
Exercise price for options
R$40
Market price at grant date (January 1, 2022)
R$40
Fair value of options at grant date (January 1, 2022)
R$6

--- Page 1321 ---
Service period
5 years
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry or entries for the first year of the share-option plan.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries for the first year of the plan assuming that, rather
than options, 700 shares of restricted shares were granted at the beginning of 2022.
c. Now assume that the market price of Sarazan shares on the grant date was R$45 per
share. Repeat the requirements for (a) and (b).
d. Sarazan would like to implement an employee share-purchase plan for rank-and-file
employees, but it would like to avoid recording expense related to this plan. Explain
how employee share-purchase plans are recorded.
P16.4 (LO 4, 5, 7) 
 (EPS with Complex Capital Structure) Amy Dyken,
controller at Fitzgerald Pharmaceutical Industries, a public company, is currently preparing
the calculation for basic and diluted earnings per share and the related disclosure for
Fitzgerald’s financial statements. Selected financial information for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 2022, is shown below.
Fitzgerald Pharmaceutical Industries 
Selected Statement of Financial Position Information 
June 30, 2022
Equity
 
Share capital—preference, 6% cumulative, €50 par value, 100,000 shares
authorized, 25,000 shares issued and outstanding
€ 1,250,000
Share capital—ordinary, €1 par, 10,000,000 shares authorized, 1,000,000
shares issued and outstanding
1,000,000
Share premium—ordinary (includes any amounts for options and
conversions)
4,000,000
Retained earnings
6,000,000
Total equity
€12,250,000
Long-term debt
 
Notes payable, 10%
€ 1,000,000
Convertible bonds payable
5,000,000
10% bonds payable
6,000,000
Total long-term debt
€12,000,000
The following transactions have also occurred at Fitzgerald.
1. Options were granted on July 1, 2021, to purchase 200,000 shares at €15 per share.
Although no options were exercised during fiscal year 2022, the average price per
ordinary share during fiscal year 2022 was €20 per share.
2. Each bond was issued at face value. The convertible bonds will convert into ordinary
shares at 50 shares per €1,000 bond. The conversion is exercisable after 5 years, and

--- Page 1322 ---
the bonds were issued in 2020. The interest on the liability component of the
convertible bonds payable for the fiscal year ending June 30, 2022, was €450,000.
3. The preference shares were issued in 2020.
4. There are no preference dividends in arrears; however, preference dividends were not
declared in fiscal year 2022.
5. The 1,000,000 ordinary shares were outstanding for the entire 2022 fiscal year.
6. Net income for fiscal year 2022 was €1,500,000, and the average income tax rate is
40%.
Instructions
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, calculate the following for Fitzgerald
Pharmaceutical Industries.
a. Basic earnings per share.
b. Diluted earnings per share.
P16.5 (LO 4) (Basic EPS: Two-Year Presentation) Meng Group is preparing the
comparative financial statements for the annual report to its shareholders for fiscal years
ended May 31, 2022, and May 31, 2023 (yen in thousands). The income from continuing
operations for each year was ¥1,800,000 and ¥2,500,000, respectively. In both years, the
company incurred a 10% interest expense on ¥2,400,000 of debt, an obligation that requires
interest-only payments for 5 years. In 2023, the company experienced a loss from
discontinued operations, net of tax, of ¥360,000. The company uses a 40% effective tax rate
for income taxes.
The capital structure of Meng Group on June 1, 2021, consisted of 1 million ordinary shares
outstanding and 20,000 shares of ¥50 par value, 6%, cumulative preference shares. There
were no preference dividends in arrears, and the company had not issued any convertible
securities, options, or warrants.
On October 1, 2021, Meng sold an additional 500,000 ordinary shares at ¥20 per share.
Meng distributed a 20% share dividend on the ordinary shares outstanding on January 1,
2022. On December 1, 2022, Meng was able to sell an additional 800,000 ordinary shares at
¥22 per share. These were the only ordinary share transactions that occurred during the 2
fiscal years.
Instructions
a. Identify whether the capital structure at Meng Group is a simple or complex capital
structure, and explain why.
b. Determine the weighted-average ordinary shares that Meng Group would use in
calculating earnings per share for the fiscal year ended:
1. May 31, 2022.
2. May 31, 2023.
c. Prepare, in good form, a comparative income statement, beginning with income from
operations, for Meng Group for the fiscal years ended May 31, 2022, and May 31, 2023.

--- Page 1323 ---
This statement will be included in Meng’s annual report and should display the
appropriate earnings per share presentations.
P16.6 (LO 5) 
 (Computation of Basic and Diluted EPS) Charles Austin of
the controller’s office of Thompson Corporation was given the assignment of determining
the basic and diluted earnings per share values for the year ending December 31, 2023.
Austin has compiled the information listed below.
1. The company is authorized to issue 8,000,000 $10 par value ordinary shares. As of
December 31, 2022, 2,000,000 shares had been issued and were outstanding.
2. The per share market prices of the ordinary shares on selected dates were as follows.
 
Price per Share
July 1, 2022
$20.00
Jan. 1, 2023
21.00
Apr. 1, 2023
25.00
July 1, 2023
11.00
Aug. 1, 2023
10.50
Nov. 1, 2023
9.00
Dec. 31, 2023
10.00
3. A total of 700,000 shares of an authorized 1,200,000 shares of convertible preference
shares have been issued on July 1, 2022. Each share had a par value of $25 and a
cumulative dividend of $3 per share. The shares are convertible into ordinary shares at
the rate of one convertible preference share for one ordinary share. The rate of
conversion is to be automatically adjusted for share splits and share dividends.
Dividends are paid quarterly on September 30, December 31, March 31, and June 30.
4. Thompson Corporation is subject to a 40% income tax rate.
5. The after-tax net income for the year ended December 31, 2023, was $11,550,000.
The following specific activities took place during 2023.
1. January 1—A 5% ordinary share dividend was issued. The dividend had been declared
on December 1, 2022, to all shareholders of record on December 29, 2022.
2. April 1—A total of 400,000 shares of the $3 convertible preference shares were
converted into ordinary shares. The company issued new ordinary shares and retired
the preference shares. This was the only conversion of the preference shares during
2023.
3. July 1—A 2-for-1 split of the ordinary shares became effective on this date. The board of
directors had authorized the split on June 1.
4. August 1—A total of 300,000 ordinary shares were issued to acquire a factory building.
5. November 1—A total of 24,000 ordinary shares were purchased on the open market at
$9 per share. These shares were to be held as treasury shares and were still in the
treasury as of December 31, 2023.

--- Page 1324 ---
6. Ordinary share cash dividends—Cash dividends to ordinary shareholders were declared
and paid as follows.
April 15—$0.30 per share.
October 15—$0.20 per share.
7. Preference share cash dividends—Cash dividends to preference shareholders were
declared and paid as scheduled.
Instructions
a. Determine the number of shares used to compute basic earnings per share for the year
ended December 31, 2023.
b. Determine the number of shares used to compute diluted earnings per share for the
year ended December 31, 2023.
c. Compute the numerator in the basic earnings per share calculation for the year ended
December 31, 2023.
P16.7 (LO 4, 5, 7) (Computation of Basic and Diluted EPS) The information below
pertains to Barkley plc for 2022.
Net income for the year
£1,200,000
8% convertible bonds issued at par (£1,000 per bond); each bond is convertible
into 30 shares of ordinary shares; the liability component of the bonds is
£1,800,000 based on a market rate of 9%
2,000,000
6% convertible, cumulative preference shares, £100 par value; each share is
convertible into 3 shares of ordinary shares
4,000,000
Ordinary shares, £10 par value
6,000,000
Tax rate for 2022
40%
Average market price of ordinary shares
£25 per
share
There were no changes during 2022 in the number of ordinary shares, preference shares, or
convertible bonds outstanding. There are no treasury shares. The company also has
ordinary share options (granted in a prior year) to purchase 75,000 ordinary shares at £20
per share.
Instructions
a. Compute basic earnings per share for 2022.
b. Compute diluted earnings per share for 2022.
P16.8 (LO 4, 7) (EPS with Share Dividend and Discontinued Operations) Agassi
AG is preparing the comparative financial statements to be included in the annual report to
shareholders. Agassi employs a fiscal year ending May 31.
Income before income tax for Agassi was €1,400,000 and €660,000, respectively, for fiscal
years ended May 31, 2023 and 2022. Agassi experienced a loss from discontinued

--- Page 1325 ---
operations of €400,000 in March 2023. A 40% combined income tax rate pertains to any
and all of Agassi AG profits, gains, and losses.
Agassi’s capital structure consists of preference shares and ordinary shares. The company
has not issued any convertible securities or warrants, and there are no outstanding share
options.
Agassi issued 40,000 shares of €100 par value, 6% cumulative preference shares in 2019.
All of these shares are outstanding, and no preference dividends are in arrears.
There were 1,000,000 shares of €1 par ordinary shares outstanding on June 1, 2021. On
September 1, 2022, Agassi sold an additional 400,000 ordinary shares at €17 per share.
Agassi distributed a 20% share dividend on the ordinary shares outstanding on December 1,
2022. These were the only ordinary share transactions during the past 2 fiscal years.
Instructions
a. Determine the weighted-average ordinary shares that would be used in computing
earnings per share on the current comparative income statement for:
1. The year ended May 31, 2022.
2. The year ended May 31, 2023.
b. Starting with income before income tax, prepare a comparative income statement for
the years ended May 31, 2023 and 2022. The statement will be part of Agassi AG annual
report to shareholders and should include appropriate earnings per share presentation.
c. The capital structure of a company is the result of its past financing decisions.
Furthermore, the earnings per share data presented on a company’s financial
statements is dependent upon the capital structure.
1. Explain why Agassi AG is considered to have a simple capital structure.
2. Describe how earnings per share data would be presented for a company that has a
complex capital structure.
Concepts for Analysis
CA16.1 (LO 1, 2, 3, 5) (Dilutive Securities, EPS) Two students are discussing the
current chapter on dilutive securities and earnings per share. Here are some of the points
raised in their discussion.
1. Is there a difference between issuing convertible debt versus issuing debt with share
warrants? Also, does it make a difference whether the share warrants are detachable or
non-detachable?
2. Why is it that companies are not permitted to adjust compensation expense for share
options when the options become worthless because the share price does not increase
in value?
3. What is the rationale for using the treasury-share method in earnings per share
computations?
4. Why do companies have to report compensation expense for employee share-purchase
plans? After the employee receives the shares, the price can go up or down, so what is

--- Page 1326 ---
the benefit that the employee is receiving?
Instructions
Prepare a response to each of the questions asked by the students.
CA16.2 (LO 3) 
 (Ethical Issues—Compensation Plan) The executive officers of
Rouse Corporation have a performance-based compensation plan. The performance criteria
of this plan are linked to growth in earnings per share. When annual EPS growth is 12%, the
Rouse executives earn 100% of the shares; if growth is 16%, they earn 125%. If EPS growth
is lower than 8%, the executives receive no additional compensation.
In 2022, Gail Devers, the controller of Rouse, reviews year-end estimates of bad debt
expense and warranty expense. She calculates the EPS growth at 15%. Kurt Adkins, a
member of the executive group, remarks over lunch one day that the estimate of bad debt
expense might be decreased, increasing EPS growth to 16.1%. Devers is not sure she should
do this because she believes that the current estimate of bad debts is sound. On the other
hand, she recognizes that a great deal of subjectivity is involved in the computation.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What, if any, is the ethical dilemma for Devers?
b. Should Devers’ knowledge of the compensation plan be a factor that influences her
estimate?
c. How should Devers respond to Adkins’ request?
CA16.3 (LO 2, 3) 
 (Share Warrants—Various Types) For various reasons a
company may issue warrants to purchase its ordinary shares at specified prices that,
depending on the circumstances, may be less than, equal to, or greater than the current
market price. For example, warrants may be issued:
1. To existing shareholders on a pro rata basis.
2. To certain key employees under an incentive share-option plan.
3. To purchasers of the company’s bonds.
Instructions
For each of the three examples of how share warrants are used:
a. Explain why they are used.
b. Discuss the significance of the price (or prices) at which the warrants are issued (or
granted) in relation to (1) the current market price of the company’s shares, and (2) the
length of time over which they can be exercised.
c. Describe the information that should be disclosed in financial statements, or notes
thereto, that are prepared when share warrants are outstanding in the hands of the
three groups listed above.

--- Page 1327 ---
CA16.4 (LO 3) 
 (Share Compensation Plans) The following item appeared on
the Internet concerning the requirement to expense share options.
“Here We Go Again!” by Jack Ciesielski (2/21/2005,
www.accountingobserver.com/blog/2005/02/here-we-go-again) “On February 17,
Congressman David Dreier (R–CA), and Congresswoman Anna Eshoo (D–CA), officially
entered Silicon Valley’s bid to gum up the launch of honest reporting of share option
compensation: They co-sponsored a bill to ‘preserve broad-based employee share option
plans and give investors critical information they need to understand how employee share
options impact the value of their shares.’ You know what “critical information” they mean:
stuff like the share compensation for the top five officers in a company, with a rigged value
set as close to zero as possible. Investors crave this kind of information. Other ways the
good Congresspersons want to “help” investors: The bill ‘also requires the SEC to study the
effectiveness of those disclosures over three years, during which time, no new accounting
standard related to the treatment of share options could be recognized. Finally, the bill
requires the Secretary of Commerce to conduct a study and report to Congress on the
impact of broad-based employee share option plans on expanding employee corporate
ownership, skilled worker recruitment and retention, research and innovation, economic
growth, and international competitiveness.’
It’s the old “four corners” basketball strategy: stall, stall, stall. In the meantime, hope for
regime change at your opponent, the standard-setter.”
Instructions
a. What are the accounting requirements related to share-based compensation?
b. How do the provisions of IFRS in this area differ from the bill introduced by members
of the U.S. Congress (Dreier and Eshoo), which would require expensing for options
issued to only the top five officers in a company? Which approach do you think would
result in more useful information? (Focus on comparability.)
c. The bill in the U.S. Congress urges a standard that preserves “the ability of companies
to use this innovative tool to attract talented employees.” Write a response to these
congresspeople explaining the importance of neutrality in financial accounting and
reporting.
CA16.5 (LO 4, 5) (EPS: Preference Dividends, Options, and Convertible Debt)
Earnings per share (EPS) is the single most reported financial statistic about modern
companies. Daily published quotations of share prices have recently been expanded to
include for many securities a “times earnings” figure that is based on EPS. Securities
analysts often focus their discussions on the EPS of the companies they study.
Instructions
a. Explain how dividends or dividend requirements on any class of preference shares that
may be outstanding affect the computation of EPS.
b. One of the technical procedures applicable in EPS computations is the treasury-share
method. Briefly describe the circumstances under which it might be appropriate to
apply the treasury-share method.

--- Page 1328 ---
c. Convertible debentures are considered potentially dilutive ordinary shares. Explain
how convertible debentures are handled for purposes of EPS computations.
CA16.6 (LO 4, 5) (EPS Concepts and Effect of Transactions on EPS) Chorkina
Corporation, a new audit client of yours, has not reported earnings per share data in its
annual reports to shareholders in the past. The treasurer, Beth Botsford, requested that you
furnish information about the reporting of earnings per share data in the current year’s
annual report in accordance with IFRS.
Instructions
a. Define the term “earnings per share” as it applies to a company with a capitalization
structure composed of only one class of ordinary shares. Explain how earnings per
share should be computed and how the information should be disclosed in the
company’s financial statements.
b. Discuss the treatment, if any, that should be given to each of the following items in
computing earnings per share of ordinary shares for financial statement reporting.
1. Outstanding preference shares issued at a premium with a par value liquidation
right.
2. The exercise at a price below market price but above book value of an ordinary
share option issued during the current fiscal year to officers of the company.
3. The replacement of a machine immediately prior to the close of the current fiscal
year at a cost 20% above the original cost of the replaced machine. The new
machine will perform the same function as the old machine, which was sold for its
book value.
4. The declaration of current dividends on cumulative preference shares.
5. The acquisition of some of the company’s outstanding ordinary shares during the
current fiscal year. The shares were classified as treasury shares.
6. A 2-for-1 share split of ordinary shares during the current fiscal year.
7. A provision created out of retained earnings for a contingent liability from a
possible lawsuit.
CA16.7 (LO 5) 
 (EPS, Antidilution) Brad Dolan, a shareholder of Rhode
Corporation, has asked you, the firm’s accountant, to explain why his share warrants were
not included in diluted EPS. In order to explain this situation, you must briefly explain what
dilutive securities are, why they are included in the EPS calculation, and why some
securities are antidilutive and thus not included in this calculation.
Instructions
Write Mr. Dolan a 1–1.5 page letter explaining why the warrants are not included in the
calculation. Use the following data to help you explain this situation.
Rhode Corporation earned $228,000 during the period, when it had an average of 100,000
ordinary shares outstanding. The ordinary shares sold at an average market price of $25 per
share during the period. Also outstanding were 30,000 warrants that could be exercised to
purchase one ordinary share at $30 per warrant.

--- Page 1329 ---
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s
complete annual report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following
questions.
a. Under M&S’s share-based compensation plan, share options are granted annually to
key managers and directors.
1. How many options were granted during 2019 under the plan?
2. How many options were exercisable at year-end 2019?
3. How many options were exercised in 2019, and what was the average price of those
exercised?
4. How many years from the grant date do the options expire?
5. To what accounts are the proceeds from these option exercises credited?
6. What was the number of outstanding options at year-end 2019, and at what
average exercise price?
b. What number of diluted weighted-average shares outstanding was used by M&S in
computing earnings per share for 2019 and 2018? What was M&S’s diluted earnings
per share in 2019 and 2018?
c. What other share-based compensation plans does M&S have?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B
and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial
statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. What employee share-option compensation plans are offered by adidas and Puma?
b. What are the weighted-average ordinary shares used by adidas and Puma in 2018 and
2017 to compute diluted EPS?
c. What was the diluted net income per share for adidas and Puma for 2018 and 2017?

--- Page 1330 ---
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
On January 1, 2022, Garner issued 10-year, €200,000 face value, 6% bonds at par. Each
€1,000 bond is convertible into 30 shares of Garner €2, par value, ordinary shares. Interest
on the bonds is paid annually on December 31. The market rate for Garner’s non-
convertible debt is 9%. The company has had 10,000 ordinary shares (and no preference
shares) outstanding throughout its life. None of the bonds have been converted as of the
end of 2023. (Ignore all tax effects.)
Accounting
a. Prepare the journal entry Garner would have made on January 1, 2022, to record the
issuance of the bonds, and prepare an amortization table for the first three years of the
bonds.
b. Garner’s net income was €30,000 in 2023, and €27,000 in 2022. Compute basic and
diluted earnings per share for Garner for 2023 and 2022.
c. Assume that all of the holders of Garner’s convertible bonds convert their bonds to
shares on January 2, 2024, when Garner’s shares are trading at €32 per share. Garner
pays €50 per bond to induce bondholders to convert. Prepare the journal entry to
record the conversion, using the book value method.
Analysis
Show how Garner will report income and EPS for 2023 and 2022. Briefly discuss the
importance of IFRS for EPS to analysts evaluating companies based on price-earnings
ratios. Consider comparisons for a company over time, as well as comparisons between
companies at a point in time.
Principles
In order to converge U.S. GAAP and IFRS, U.S. standard-setters (the FASB) are considering
whether the equity element of a convertible bond should be reported as equity. Describe
how the journal entry you made in part (a) above would differ under U.S. GAAP. In terms of
the accounting principles discussed in Chapter 2, what does IFRS for convertible debt
accomplish that U.S. GAAP potentially sacrifices? What does U.S. GAAP for convertible debt
accomplish that IFRS potentially sacrifices?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), paras. 28–32.
[2] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. BC29.

--- Page 1331 ---
[3] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. AG34.
[4] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 36.
[5] International Financial Reporting Standard 2, Share-Based Payment (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2004), par. 16.
[6] International Financial Reporting Standard 2, Share-Based Payment (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2004), par. BC11.
[7] International Financial Reporting Standard 2, Share-Based Payment (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2004), par. IN8.
[8] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 66.
[9] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 1.
[10] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 39.
[11] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 56.
[12] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 66.
[13] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 58.
Research Case
Richardson Company is contemplating the establishment of a share-based compensation
plan to provide long-run incentives for its top management. However, members of the
compensation committee of the board of directors have voiced some concerns about
adopting these plans, based on news accounts related to a recent accounting standard in
this area. They would like you to conduct some research on this recent standard so they can
be better informed about the accounting for these plans.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS
access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in
your Internet browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the authoritative literature that addresses the accounting for share-based
payment compensation plans.
b. Briefly discuss the objectives for the accounting for share-based compensation. What is
the role of fair value measurement?
c. The Richardson Company board is also considering an employee share-purchase plan,
but the Board does not want to record expense related to the plan. What are the IFRS

--- Page 1332 ---
requirements for the accounting for an employee share-purchase plan?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8
Compare the accounting for dilutive securities and earnings per share under IFRS and
U.S. GAAP.
Both the FASB and the IASB are working on a standard related to the distinction between
liabilities and equity. The U.S. GAAP approach to account for certain dilutive securities,
such as convertible debt and debt issued with share warrants, is different from that of IFRS.
The accounting and disclosure requirements for accounting for share options and EPS
computations are similar between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Relevant Facts
Similarities
U.S. GAAP and IFRS follow the same model for recognizing share-based compensation:
The fair value of shares and options awarded to employees is recognized over the
period to which the employees’ services relate.
Although the calculation of basic and diluted earnings per share is similar between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS, the Boards are working to resolve the few minor differences in EPS
reporting. One proposal in the FASB project concerns contracts that can be settled in
either cash or shares. IFRS requires that share settlement must be used, while U.S.
GAAP gives companies a choice. The FASB project proposes adopting the IFRS
approach, thus converging U.S. GAAP and IFRS in this regard.
Differences
A significant difference between U.S. GAAP and IFRS is the accounting for securities
with characteristics of debt and equity, such as convertible debt. Under U.S. GAAP, all
of the proceeds of convertible debt are recorded as long-term debt. Under IFRS,
convertible bonds are “bifurcated”—separated into the equity component (the value of
the conversion option) of the bond issue and the debt component.
Related to employee share-purchase plans, these plans under U.S. GAAP are often
considered non-compensatory, and therefore no compensation is recorded. However,
certain conditions must exist before a plan can be considered non-compensatory (see
the discussion below in the About the Numbers section for U.S. GAAP treatment).
Under IFRS, all employee share-purchase plans are deemed to be compensatory; that
is, compensation expense is recorded for the amount of the discount.
Modification of a share option results in the recognition of any incremental fair value
under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS. However, if the modification leads to a reduction, U.S.
GAAP permits the reduction. IFRS does not.

--- Page 1333 ---
Other EPS differences relate to (1) the treasury-share method and how the proceeds
from extinguishment of a liability should be accounted for, and (2) how to compute the
weighted average of contingently issuable shares.
About the Numbers
Accounting for Convertible Bonds
As indicated, a significant difference in U.S. GAAP and IFRS is the accounting for
convertible debt. To illustrate, assume PepsiCo (USA) issued, at par, $10 million of 10-year
convertible bonds with a coupon rate of 4.75%. Assuming the conversion is settled in
shares, PepsiCo makes the following entry to record the issuance under U.S. GAAP.
Cash
10,000,000  
Bonds Payable  
10,000,000
Under IFRS, PepsiCo must split out the liability and equity component—the value of the
conversion option—of the bond issue.
Thus, IFRS records separately the bond issue’s debt and equity components. Many believe
this provides a more faithful representation of the impact of the bond issue. However, there
are concerns about reliability of the method used to estimate the liability component of the
bond.
Employee Stock-Purchase Plans Under U.S. GAAP
Employee stock-purchase plans (ESPPs) generally permit all employees to purchase shares
at a discounted price for a short period of time. The company often uses such plans to
secure equity capital or to induce widespread ownership of its common stock (ordinary
shares) among employees. Under U.S. GAAP, these plans are considered compensatory
unless they satisfy all three conditions presented below.
1. Substantially all full-time employees may participate on an equitable basis.
2. The discount relative to the market price is small. That is, the discount does not exceed
the per share amount of costs avoided by not having to raise cash in a public offering. If
the amount of the discount is 5% or less, no compensation needs to be recorded.
3. The plan offers no substantive option feature.
For example, Masthead Company’s stock-purchase plan allowed employees who met
minimal employment qualifications to purchase its shares at a 5% reduction from market
price for a short period of time. The reduction from market price is not considered
compensatory. Why? Because the per share amount of the costs avoided by not having to
raise the cash in a public offering equals 5%. Companies that offer their employees a
compensatory ESPP should record the compensation expense over the service life of the
employees.
It is difficult for some companies to claim that their ESPPs are non-compensatory (and
therefore not record compensation expense) unless they change their discount policy,
which in the past often was 15%. If they change their discount policy to 5%, participation in
these plans will undoubtedly be lower. As a result, it is likely that some U.S. companies will
end up dropping these plans.

--- Page 1334 ---
On the Horizon
The FASB has been working on a standard that will likely converge with IFRS standards in
the accounting for convertible debt. Similar to the IASB, the FASB is examining the
classification of hybrid securities; the IASB is seeking comment on a discussion document
similar to the FASB Preliminary Views document, “Financial Instruments with
Characteristics of Equity.” It is hoped that the Boards will develop a converged standard in
this area. While U.S. GAAP and IFRS are similar as to the presentation of EPS, the Boards
have been considering a project to resolve remaining differences related to earnings per
share computations.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. All of the following are key similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for dilutive securities and EPS except:
a. the model for recognizing share-based compensation.
b. the calculation of basic and diluted EPS.
c. the accounting for convertible debt.
d. the accounting for modifications of share option, when the value increases.
2. Which of the following statements is correct?
a. IFRS separates the proceeds of a convertible bond between debt and equity by
determining the fair value of the debt component before the equity component.
b. When there is a choice of settlement of an option for cash or shares, share settlement
is assumed by both IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
c. IFRS separates the proceeds of a convertible bond between debt and equity, based on
relative fair values.
d. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS separate the proceeds of convertible bonds between debt and
equity.
3. Under IFRS, convertible bonds:
a. are separated into the bond component and the expense component.
b. are separated into debt and equity components.
c. are separated into their components based on relative fair values.
d. All of the above.
4. Mae Jong Corp. issues $1,000,000 of 10% bonds payable, which may be converted into
10,000 shares of $2 par value ordinary shares. The market rate of interest on similar bonds
is 12%. Interest is payable annually on December 31, and the bonds were issued for total
proceeds of $1,000,000. Under U.S. GAAP, in accounting for these bonds, Mae Jong Corp.
will:
a. first assign a value to the equity component, then determine the liability component.

--- Page 1335 ---
b. assign no value to the equity component since the conversion privilege is not separable
from the bond.
c. first assign a value to the liability component based on the face amount of the bond.
d. use the “with-and-without” method to value the compound instrument.
5. Anazazi Co. offers all its 10,000 employees the opportunity to participate in an employee
share-purchase plan. Under the terms of the plan, the employees are entitled to purchase
100 ordinary shares (par value $1 per share) at a 3% discount. The purchase price must be
paid immediately upon acceptance of the offer. There is no option feature in the plan. In
total, 8,500 employees accept the offer, and each employee purchases on average 80 shares
at $26.68 per share (market price $27.50). Under U.S. GAAP, Anazazi Co. will record:
a. no compensation since the plan is used to raise capital, not compensate employees.
b. compensation expense of $850,000.
c. compensation expense of $22,678,000.
d. compensation expense of $697,000.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP16.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and
IFRS with respect to the accounting for share-based compensation.
GAAP16.2 Norman SA., a fast-growing golf equipment company, uses IFRS. It is
considering the issuance of convertible bonds. The bonds mature in 10 years, have a face
value of €400,000, and pay interest annually at a rate of 4%. The net present value of the
liability component is €365,000. Greg Shark is curious as to the difference in accounting for
these bonds if the company were to use U.S. GAAP. (a) Prepare the entry to record the
issuance of the bonds at par under IFRS. (b) Repeat the requirement for part (a), assuming
application of U.S. GAAP to the bond issuance. (c) Which approach provides the better
accounting? Explain.
GAAP16.3 Drug company Sepracor, Inc., (USA) reported the following information in a
recent annual report (amounts in thousands). The company prepares its financial
statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Current liabilities
$  554,114
Convertible subordinated debt
648,020
Total liabilities
1,228,313
Stockholders’ equity
176,413
Net income
58,333
Analysts attempting to compare Sepracor to international drug companies may face a
challenge due to differences in accounting for convertible debt under IFRS. Under IAS 32,
“Financial Instruments,” convertible bonds, at issuance, must be classified separately into
their debt and equity components based on estimated fair value.
Instructions

--- Page 1336 ---
a. Compute the following ratios for Sepracor, Inc. (Assume that year-end balances
approximate annual averages.)
1. Return on assets.
2. Return on shareholders’ equity.
3. Debt to assets ratio.
b. Briefly discuss the operating performance and financial position of Sepracor. Industry
averages for these ratios were ROA 3.5%, return on equity 16%, and debt to assets 75%.
Based on this analysis, would you make an investment in the company’s 5% convertible
bonds? Explain.
c. Assume you want to compare Sepracor to a company like Bayer (DEU), which
prepares its financial statements in accordance with IFRS. Assuming that the fair value
of the liability component of Sepracor’s convertible bonds is $398,020, how would you
adjust the analysis above to make valid comparisons between Sepracor and Bayer?
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. a 3. b 4. b 5. a
Notes
1 Presently, the IASB is working to develop a standard that will improve the financial
reporting requirements for financial instruments with characteristics of debt and equity.
It recognizes that the line between debt and equity is sometimes blurred and therefore
classification of these instruments is inconsistent. At this point, the Board has focused
on identification of a presentation that would help address challenges in practice in
classifying financial instruments that will or may be settled in the issuer’s own equity
instruments. In particular, the Board explored potential clarifications to the underlying
principle for classifying derivatives in the issuer’s own equity. See the IFRS website for
more information.
2 As with any investment, a buyer has to be careful. For example, Wherehouse
Entertainment Inc. (USA), which had 6¼ percent convertibles outstanding, was taken
private in a leveraged buyout. As a result, the convertible was suddenly as risky as a junk
bond of a highly leveraged company with a coupon of only 6¼ percent. As one holder of
the convertibles noted, “What’s even worse is that the company will be so loaded down
with debt that it probably won’t have enough cash flow to make its interest payments.
And the convertible debt we hold is subordinated to the rest of Wherehouse’s debt.”
These types of situations have made convertibles less attractive and have led to the
introduction of takeover protection covenants in some convertible bond offerings.
Further, sometimes convertibles are permitted to be called at par, and therefore the
conversion premium may be lost.
3 Transaction costs related to the liability and equity components are allocated in
proportion to the proceeds received from the two components. For purposes of
homework, use the Share Premium—Conversion Equity account to record the equity
component. In practice, there may be considerable variance in the accounts used to
record this component.

--- Page 1337 ---
4 From the illustration, it is apparent that buying warrants can be an “all or nothing”
proposition.
5 These factors include the volatility of the underlying shares, the expected life of the
options, the risk-free rate during the option life, and the expected dividends during the
option life.
6 “To vest” means “to earn the rights to.” An employee’s award becomes vested at the date
that the employee’s right to receive or retain shares or cash under the award is no longer
contingent on remaining in the service of the employer.
7 Companies sometimes modify the terms and conditions on which the share options were
granted, to reward outstanding performance or provide a morale boost for some or all
employees. Modifications may reduce the exercise period, extend the term of the options,
or increase the number of shares issuable upon exercise. Modifications to share-based
arrangements that decrease the fair value of the grant are basically ignored. However, if
the fair value of the grant increases due to a modification, then the incremental fair
value of the modified grant should be accounted for as additional compensation expense
over the remaining vesting period.
8 Most companies base vesting on future service for a period of generally three to five
years. Vesting may also be conditioned on some performance target such as revenue, net
income, cash flows, or some combination of these three factors. The employee also
collects dividends on the restricted shares. These dividends generally must be repaid if
forfeiture occurs.
9 There are numerous variations on restricted-share plans, including restricted-share units
(for which the shares are issued at the end of the vesting period) and restricted-share
plans with performance targets, such as EPS or share price growth.
10 As indicated, employee share-purchase plans offer company shares to workers through
payroll deduction, often at significant discounts. Unfortunately, many employees do not
avail themselves of this benefit. Hopefully, if you have the opportunity to purchase your
company’s shares at a significant discount, you will take advantage of the plan. By not
participating, you are “leaving money on the table.”
11 In general, a non-public enterprise is an enterprise whose debt or equity securities are
not traded in a public market on a foreign or domestic securities exchange or in the over-
the-counter market (including securities quoted locally or regionally). An enterprise is
not considered a non-public enterprise when its financial statements are issued in
preparation for the sale of any class of securities in a public market.
12 A potential ordinary share is a financial instrument or other contract that may entitle its
holder to ordinary shares. Examples of potential ordinary shares are (1) convertible debt
and convertible preference shares that are convertible into ordinary shares, (2) options
and warrants, and (3) shares that would be issued upon the satisfaction of conditions
resulting from contractual arrangements, such as the purchase of a business or other
assets. These concepts are discussed later in this chapter.
13 Recall that an ordinary share is an equity instrument that is subordinate to all other
classes of equity instruments. In addition, we assume that ordinary shares relate only to

--- Page 1338 ---
the controlling interest. As a result, the earnings per share computation does not include
earnings related to the non-controlling interest.
14 Issuance of these types of securities is typical in mergers and compensation plans.
15 As indicated earlier, a convertible bond is a compound instrument that has both a
liability and an equity component. As a result, the interest expense reported on the
income statement will not equal the interest paid in cash during the period. The interest
adjustment in the numerator is based on interest expense reported on the income
statement. That is, interest expense, net of tax, is added back to net income.
16 Conversion of bonds is dilutive because EPS with conversion (£1.97) is less than basic
EPS (£2.10). See Appendix 16B for a comprehensive evaluation of antidilution with
multiple securities.
17 The incremental number of shares may be more simply computed:
× Number of options = Number of shares
× 1,500 options = 600 shares
18 Options and warrants have essentially the same assumptions and computational
problems, although warrants may allow or require the tendering of some other security,
such as debt, in lieu of cash upon exercise. This subject is beyond the scope of this text.
19 In addition to contingent issuances of shares, other situations that might lead to dilution
are the issuance of both participating securities and two-class ordinary shares. The
reporting of these types of securities in EPS computations is beyond the scope of this
text.
20 Some SARs can be settled in shares or cash. When a SAR can be settled in shares or cash
at the issuer’s option, the SAR is always considered to be settled in shares. [13]
21 A company that does not report a discontinued operation uses net income as the control
number.
22 If a company reports a loss from continuing operations, basic and diluted earnings per
share will be the same because potential ordinary shares will be antidilutive even if the
company reports final net income. The IASB believes that comparability of EPS
information will be improved by using income from continuing operations as the control
number.
Sources: Louis Lavelle, “Kicking the Stock-Options Habit,” Businessweek Online (February 16, 2005); “Stock
Compensation: 2018 Assumptions and Disclosure Study,” PricewaterhouseCoopers (August 2018); and A. Ludwig, “CEO
Pay Trends Around the Globe,” corpgov.law.harvard.edu/contributor/andrew-ludwig/ (February 3, 2019).
Market price  − Option price
Market price
€50 −€30
€50

--- Page 1339 ---
