CHAPTER 13
Current Liabilities, Provisions, and Contingencies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the nature, valuation, and reporting of current liabilities.
2. Explain the accounting for different types of provisions.
3. Explain the accounting for loss and gain contingencies.
4. Indicate how to present and analyze liability-related information.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are integral to the
topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 13
As the following opening story indicates, the IASB continues to work toward improved reporting
of liabilities. In this chapter, we explain the basic issues related to accounting and reporting for
current liabilities, provisions, and contingencies. The content and organization of the chapter are
as follows. (Note that Global Accounting Issues related to liabilities is presented in Chapter 14.)
Now You See It, Now You Don’t
A look at the liabilities side of the statement of financial position of the company Beru AG (DEU),
dated March 31, 2003, shows how international standards have changed the reporting of financial
information. Here is how one liability was shown on this date:
Anticipated losses arising from pending transactions 3,285,000 euros
German accounting rules at that time were permissive: They allowed companies to report liabilities for
possible future events. In essence, the establishment of this general-purpose “liability” provided a
buffer for Beru if losses were to materialize. This was a problem, since Beru could manipulate its
income by charging expenses in good years and reducing expenses in bad years.

--- Page 1048 ---
The story has a happy ending: European companies switched to International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS). Under IFRS, liabilities like “Anticipated losses arising from pending transactions”
disappear. So when we look at IFRS financial statements today, companies report as liabilities only
obligations arising from past transactions that can be reasonably estimated.
Standard-setters continue to work on the financial reporting of certain “contingent” liabilities, such as
those related to pending lawsuits and other possible losses for which a company might be liable. As you
will learn in this chapter, standard-setters have provided more transparency in reporting liability-type
transactions. However, much still needs to be done. For example, the IASB is considering a number of
changes in how to recognize and measure contingent liabilities, a difficult task. Consider a simple
illustration involving a company that sells hamburgers:
The hamburgers are sold in a jurisdiction where the law states that the seller must pay €100,000
to each customer who purchases a contaminated hamburger;
At the end of the reporting period, the company has sold one hamburger; and
Past experience indicates there is a one in a million chance that a hamburger sold by the entity is
contaminated. No other information is available.
Does the company have a liability? What is the conceptual justification, if any, to record a liability or
for that matter, not to record a liability? And if you conclude that the sale of the hamburger results in a
liability, how do you measure it? Another way to ask the question is whether the hamburger issue is a
recognition issue or a measurement issue. This example illustrates some of the difficult questions that
the IASB faces in this area.
The current discussion related to contingent liabilities centers on several areas. First, as discussed in
Chapter 2, the most recent revision of the Conceptual Framework by the IASB has modified the
definition of a liability. As a result, the IASB will need to consider its guidance related to all liabilities,
including contingent liabilities, to ensure that it conforms to the new definition. In addition, the IASB
has decided to consider a number of specific questions related to its current guidance in this area,
including the following.
1. What specific future costs should be considered when determining the amount of a contingent
liability?
2. When the amount of a contingent liability is based on the present value of future cash flows, what
discount rate should be used?
3. When there is uncertainty in the amount of future cash flows related to a contingent liability
(which there almost always is), how should this uncertainty be considered when measuring the
contingent liability?
4. When a company has a contingent liability but it also has a right to be reimbursed by another party
for all or part of that liability, what level of certainty must be achieved in order to recognize the
reimbursement right?
5. When an event that confirms that a contingent asset exists occurs after the end of the reporting
period, but before the financial statements are issued, should the subsequent event be considered
in determining if the contingent assets existed at the reporting date?
As you can probably tell, each of these questions represents important issues that need to be addressed
in the IASB standards. After studying this chapter, you will be better equipped to tackle these and other
difficult questions related to liabilities. Stay tuned as this important topic continues to evolve.

--- Page 1049 ---
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted summary review
and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well
as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Current Liabilities
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the nature, valuation, and reporting of current liabilities.
The question, “What is a liability?” is not easy to answer. For example, are preference shares a liability
or an ownership claim? The first reaction is to say that preference shares are in fact an ownership
claim, and companies should report them as part of equity. In fact, preference shares have many
elements of debt as well. The issuer (and in some cases the holder) often has the right to call the
shares within a specific period of time—making them similar to a repayment of principal. The
dividends on the preference shares are in many cases almost guaranteed (the cumulative provision)—
making them look like interest. As a result, preference shares are but one of many financial
instruments that are difficult to classify.1
To help resolve some of these controversies, the IASB, as part of its Conceptual Framework, defines a
liability as a present obligation of the entity to transfer an economic resource as a result of past events
(see Underlying Concepts). In other words, a liability has three essential characteristics:
1. It is a present obligation.
2. It requires a transfer of economic resources (cash, goods, services).
3. It arises from past events. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References section near the end of
the chapter.)
Underlying Concepts
To determine the appropriate classification of specific financial instruments, companies need
proper definitions of assets, liabilities, and equities. They often use the Conceptual Framework
definitions as the basis for resolving controversial classification issues.
Because liabilities involve future disbursements of assets or services, one of their most important
features is the date on which they are payable. A company must satisfy currently maturing obligations
in the ordinary course of business to continue operating. Liabilities with a more distant due date do
not, as a rule, represent a claim on the company’s current resources. They are therefore in a slightly
different category. This feature gives rise to the basic division of liabilities into (1) current liabilities
and (2) non-current liabilities.
Recall that current assets are cash or other assets that companies reasonably expect to convert into
cash, sell, or consume in operations within a single operating cycle or within a year (if completing more
than one cycle each year). Similarly, a current liability is reported if one of two conditions exists: 2
1. The liability is expected to be settled within its normal operating cycle; or
2. The liability is expected to be settled within 12 months after the reporting date.
This definition has gained wide acceptance because it recognizes operating cycles of varying lengths in
different industries.

--- Page 1050 ---
The operating cycle is the period of time elapsing between the acquisition of goods and services
involved in the manufacturing process and the final cash realization resulting from sales and
subsequent collections. Industries that manufacture products requiring an aging process, as well as
certain capital-intensive industries, have an operating cycle of considerably more than one year. In
these cases, companies classify operating items, such as accounts payable and accruals for wages and
other expenses, as current liabilities, even if they are due to be settled more than 12 months after the
reporting period.
Here are some typical current liabilities:
1. Accounts payable.
6. Customer advances and deposits.
2. Notes payable.
7. Unearned revenues.
3. Current maturities of long-term debt.
8. Sales and value-added taxes payable.
4. Short-term obligations expected to be refinanced.
9. Income taxes payable.
5. Dividends payable.
10. Employee-related liabilities.
Accounts Payable
Accounts payable, or trade accounts payable, are balances owed to others for goods, supplies, or
services purchased on open account. Accounts payable arise because of the time lag between the
receipt of services or acquisition of title to assets and the payment for them. The terms of the sale (e.g.,
2/10, net 30 or 1/10, E.O.M.) usually state this period of extended credit, commonly 30 to 60 days.
Most companies record liabilities for purchases of goods upon receipt of the goods. If title has passed
to the purchaser before receipt of the goods, the company should record the transaction at the time of
title passage. A company must pay special attention to transactions occurring near the end of one
accounting period and at the beginning of the next. It needs to ascertain that the record of goods
received (the inventory) agrees with the liability (accounts payable), and that it records both in the
proper period.
Measuring the amount of an account payable poses no particular difficulty. The invoice received from
the creditor specifies the due date and the exact outlay in money that is necessary to settle the account.
The only calculation that may be necessary concerns the amount of cash discount. See Chapter 8 for
illustrations of entries related to accounts payable and purchase discounts.
Notes Payable
Notes payable are written promises to pay a certain sum of money on a specified future date. They
may arise from purchases, financing, or other transactions. Some industries require notes (often
referred to as trade notes payable) as part of the sales/purchases transaction in lieu of the normal
extension of open account credit. Notes payable to banks or loan companies generally arise from cash
loans. Companies classify notes as short-term or long-term, depending on the payment due date. Notes
may also be interest-bearing or zero-interest-bearing.
Interest-Bearing Note Issued
Assume that Castle Bank agrees to lend €100,000 on March 1, 2022, to Landscape Co. if Landscape
signs a €100,000, 6 percent, four-month note. Landscape records the cash received on March 1 as
follows.
March 1, 2022
Cash
100,000
Notes Payable
100,000
(To record issuance of 6%, 4-month note to Castle Bank)

--- Page 1051 ---
If Landscape prepares financial statements semiannually, it makes the following adjusting entry to
recognize interest expense and interest payable of €2,000 (€100,000 × .06 × 4⁄12) at June 30, 2022.
June 30, 2022
Interest Expense
2,000
Interest Payable
2,000
(To accrue interest for 4 months on Castle Bank note)
If Landscape prepares financial statements monthly, its interest expense at the end of each month is
€500 (€100,000 × .06 × 1⁄12).
At maturity (July 1, 2022), Landscape must pay the face value of the note (€100,000) plus €2,000
interest (€100,000 × .06 × 4⁄12). Landscape records payment of the note and accrued interest as follows.
July 1, 2022
Notes Payable
100,000
Interest Payable
2,000
Cash
102,000
(To record payment of Castle Bank interest-bearing note and accrued interest at
maturity)
Zero-Interest-Bearing Note Issued
A company may issue a zero-interest-bearing note instead of an interest-bearing note. A zero-interest-
bearing note does not explicitly state an interest rate on the face of the note. Interest is still
charged, however. At maturity, the borrower must pay back an amount greater than the cash received
at the issuance date. In other words, the borrower receives in cash the present value of the note. The
present value equals the face value of the note at maturity minus the interest or discount charged by
the lender for the term of the note.
To illustrate, assume that Landscape issues a €102,000, four-month, zero-interest-bearing note to
Castle Bank on March 1, 2022. The present value of the note is €100,000. Landscape records this
transaction as follows.
March 1, 2022
Cash
100,000
Notes Payable
100,000
(To record issuance of 4-month, zero-interest-bearing note to Castle Bank)
Landscape credits the Notes Payable account for the present value of the note, which is €100,000. If
Landscape prepares financial statements semiannually, it makes the following adjusting entry to
recognize the interest expense and the increase in the note payable of €2,000 at June 30, 2022.
June 30, 2022
Interest Expense
2,000
Notes Payable
2,000
(To accrue interest for 4 months on Castle Bank note)
At maturity (July 1, 2022), Landscape must pay the face value of the note, as follows.
July 1, 2022
Notes Payable
102,000
Cash
102,000

--- Page 1052 ---
July 1, 2022
(To record payment of Castle Bank zero-interest-bearing at maturity)
In this case, the amount of interest expense recorded and the total cash outlay are exactly the same
whether Landscape signed a loan agreement with a stated interest rate or used the zero-interest-rate
approach. This circumstance rarely happens, because often the borrower on an interest-bearing note
will have to make monthly cash payments for interest during the term of the note. We discuss
additional accounting issues related to notes payable in Chapter 14.
Current Maturities of Long-Term Debt
Ahold Delhaize Group (NLD/BEL) reports as part of its current liabilities the portion of bonds,
mortgage notes, and other long-term indebtedness that matures within the next fiscal year. It
categorizes this amount as current maturities of long-term debt. Companies such as Ahold
Delhaize exclude currently maturing long-term debts from current liabilities if they are to be:
1. Refinanced, or retired from the proceeds of a new long-term debt issue (discussed in the next
section); or,
2. Converted into ordinary shares.
When only a part of a long-term debt is to be paid within the next 12 months, as in the case of serial
bonds that a company retires through a series of annual installments, a company reports the
maturing portion of long-term debt as a current liability and the remaining portion as a long-
term debt.
However, a company should classify as current any liability that is due on demand (callable by the
creditor), or will be due on demand within one year (or operating cycle, if longer). Liabilities often
become callable by the creditor when there is a violation of the debt agreement. For example, most
debt agreements specify that a given level of equity to debt be maintained, or specify that working
capital be of a minimum amount. If the company violates an agreement, it must classify the debt as
current because it is a reasonable expectation that existing working capital will be used to satisfy the
debt.
To illustrate a breach of a covenant, assume that Gyro Company on November 1, 2022, has a long-term
note payable to Sanchez SA, which is due on April 1, 2024. Unfortunately, Gyro breaches a covenant in
the note, and the obligation becomes payable on demand. Gyro is preparing its financial statements at
December 31, 2022. Given the breach in the covenant, Gyro must classify its obligation as current.
However, Gyro can classify the liability as non-current if Sanchez agrees before December 31, 2022, to
provide a grace period for the breach of the agreement. The grace period must end at least 12 months
after December 31, 2022, to be reported as a non-current liability. If the agreement is not finalized by
December 31, 2022, Gyro must classify the note payable as a current liability. [2]
Short-Term Obligations Expected to Be Refinanced
Short-term obligations are debts scheduled to mature within one year after the date of a company’s
statement of financial position or within its normal operating cycle. Some short-term obligations
are expected to be refinanced on a long-term basis. These short-term obligations will not require
the use of working capital during the next year (or operating cycle).3
At one time, the accounting profession generally supported the exclusion of short-term obligations
from current liabilities if they were “expected to be refinanced.” But the profession provided no specific
guidelines, so companies determined whether a short-term obligation was “expected to be refinanced”
based solely on management’s intent to refinance on a long-term basis. Classification was not clear-
cut. For example, a company might obtain a five-year bank loan but handle the actual financing with
90-day notes, which it must keep turning over (renewing). In this case, is the loan a long-term debt or a
current liability? It depends on refinancing criteria.

--- Page 1053 ---
Refinancing Criteria
To resolve these classification problems, the IASB has developed criteria for determining the
circumstances under which short-term obligations may be properly excluded from current liabilities.
Specifically, a company can exclude a short-term obligation from current liabilities if, at the financial
statement date, it has the right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the
reporting date. A common scenario for deferral is a refinancing.
The right to refinance on a long-term basis means that the company expects to refinance the short-
term obligation so that it will not require the use of working capital during the ensuing fiscal year (or
operating cycle, if longer). Entering into a financing arrangement that clearly permits the company to
refinance the debt on a long-term basis on terms that are readily determinable before the next
reporting date is one way to satisfy the refinancing condition. In addition, the fact that a company has
the right to refinance at any time permits the company to classify the liability as non-current.
Illustration 13.1 presents an analysis of refinancing.

--- Page 1054 ---
Refinancing
Facts: Haddad SE provides the following information related to its note payable.
Issued note payable of €3,000,000 on November 30, 2022, due on February 28, 2023. Haddad’s
reporting date is December 31, 2022.
Haddad expects to extend the maturity date of the loan (refinance the loan) to June 30, 2024.
Its December 31, 2022, financial statements are authorized for issue on March 15, 2023.
The necessary paperwork to refinance the loan is completed on January 15, 2023. Haddad did not
have an unconditional right to defer settlement of the obligation at December 31, 2022.
The refinancing events are shown in the following timeline.
Questions: (1) What is the accounting treatment for Haddad’s short-term debt to be
refinanced if a contract to refinance is completed on January 15, 2023? (2) What is the
accounting treatment for the short-term debt to be refinanced if a contract to refinance
is completed by December 31, 2022?
Solution:
1. Haddad must classify its note payable as a current liability because the contract for refinancing
is not completed by December 31, 2022. The rationale: Refinancing a liability after the
statement of financial position date does not affect the liquidity or solvency at statement of
financial position, the reporting of which should reflect contractual agreements in force only up
to the financial statement sheet date. [2]
2. Haddad should classify the note payable as non-current because it has a contract, which gives it
the right to defer payment to June 30, 2024, and the contract is in effect as of December 31,
2022.
As indicated in Illustration 13.1, decisions about the classification of debt are based on facts and
circumstances that exist as of the reporting date (that is, as of the statement of financial position
date). [3]
ILLUSTRATION 13.1 Refinancing Analysis

--- Page 1055 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Going, Going, Gone
A classic example of the need for rules for liabilities expected to be refinanced is the case of Penn
Central Railroad (USA) before it went bankrupt. The railroad was deep into short-term debt but
classified it as long-term debt. Why? Because the railroad believed it had commitments from
lenders to keep refinancing the short-term debt. When those commitments suddenly disappeared,
it was “good-bye Pennsy.” As the Greek philosopher Epictetus once said, “Some things in this
world are not and yet appear to be.”
Dividends Payable
A cash dividend payable is an amount owed by a company to its shareholders as a result of the
board of directors’ authorization (or in other cases, vote of shareholders). At the date of declaration,
the company assumes a liability that places the shareholders in the position of creditors in the amount
of dividends declared. Because companies always pay cash dividends within one year of declaration
(generally within three months), they classify them as current liabilities.
On the other hand, companies do not recognize accumulated but undeclared dividends on cumulative
preference shares as a liability. Why? Because preference dividends in arrears are not an
obligation until the board of directors authorizes the payment. Nevertheless, companies should
disclose the amount of cumulative dividends unpaid in a note, or show it parenthetically in the share
capital section (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
Preference dividends in arrears do represent a probable future economic sacrifice, but the
expected sacrifice does not result from a past transaction or past event. The sacrifice will result
from a future event (declaration by the board of directors). Note disclosure improves the
predictive value of the financial statements.
Dividends payable in the form of additional shares are not recognized as a liability. Such share
dividends (as we discuss in Chapter 15) do not require future outlays of assets or services. Companies
generally report such undistributed share dividends in the equity section because they represent
retained earnings in the process of transfer to share capital.
Customer Advances and Deposits
Current liabilities may include returnable cash deposits received from customers and employees.
Companies may receive deposits from customers to guarantee performance of a contract or service or
as guarantees to cover payment of expected future obligations. For example, a company like Vodafone
(GBR) often requires a deposit on equipment that customers use to connect to the Internet or to access
Vodafone’s other services. Vodafone also may receive deposits from customers as guarantees for
possible damage to property. Additionally, some companies require their employees to make deposits
for the return of keys or other company property.
The classification of these items as current or non-current liabilities depends on the time between the
date of the deposit and the termination of the relationship that required the deposit.
Unearned Revenues
A magazine publisher such as Hachette (FRA) receives payment when a customer subscribes to its
magazines. An airline company such as China Southern Airlines (CHN) sells tickets for future
flights. And software companies like Microsoft (USA) issue coupons that allow customers to upgrade

--- Page 1056 ---
to the next version of their software. How do these companies account for unearned revenues that
they receive before providing goods or performing services?
1. When a company receives an advance payment, it debits Cash and credits a current liability
account identifying the source of the unearned revenue.
2. When a company recognizes revenue, it debits the unearned revenue account and credits a
revenue account.
To illustrate, assume that Logo University sells 10,000 season soccer tickets at $50 each for its five-
game home schedule. Logo University records the sales of season tickets as follows.
August 6
Cash
500,000
Unearned Sales Revenue
500,000
(To record sale of 10,000 season tickets)
After each game, Logo University makes the following entry.
September 7
Unearned Sales Revenue
100,000
Sales Revenue
100,000
(To record soccer ticket revenue)
The account Unearned Sales Revenue represents unearned revenue. Logo University reports it as a
current liability in the statement of financial position because the school has a performance obligation.
As ticket holders attend games, Logo recognizes revenue and reclassifies the amount from Unearned
Sales Revenue to Sales Revenue. Unearned revenue is material for some companies: In the airline
industry, for example, tickets sold for future flights represent almost 50 percent of total current
liabilities.
Illustration 13.2 shows specific unearned revenue and revenue accounts sometimes used in selected
types of businesses.
Account Title
Type of 
Business
Unearned Revenue
Revenue
Airline
Unearned Passenger Ticket Revenue Passenger Revenue
Magazine publisher Unearned Subscription Revenue
Subscription Revenue
Hotel
Unearned Rental Revenue
Rental Revenue
Auto dealer
Unearned Warranty Revenue
Warranty Revenue
Retailers
Unearned Gift Card Revenue
Sales Revenue
ILLUSTRATION 13.2 Unearned Revenue and Revenue Accounts
The statement of financial position reports obligations for any commitments that are redeemable in
goods and services. The income statement reports revenues related to performance obligations
satisfied during the period.

--- Page 1057 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
SAP’s Liabilities—Good or Bad?
Users of financial statements generally examine current liabilities to assess a company’s liquidity
and overall financial flexibility. Companies must pay many current liabilities, such as accounts
payable, wages payable, and taxes payable, sooner rather than later. A substantial increase in
these liabilities should therefore raise a red flag about a company’s financial position. However,
this is not the case for all current liabilities.
For example, SAP (DEU) has a current liability account entitled “Contract liabilities/deferred
income” with a balance in the most recent period of €3.028 billion, which is almost 24 percent of
total current liabilities and over 13 percent of total liabilities. This account has been increasing
year after year. Deferred income is a liability account that arises from SAP’s sales of cloud
subscription services and software support services where the payments are collected in advance.
Market analysts read such an increase in deferred income as a positive signal about SAP’s sales
and profitability. When SAP’s sales are growing, its deferred income account increases. Thus, an
increase in a liability is good news about SAP’s sales. At the same time, a decline in deferred
income is bad news. As one commentator noted, a slowdown or reversal of the growth in SAP’s
deferred income indicates both slowing sales and cash flows, which is bad news for investors.
Thus, increases in current liabilities can sometimes be viewed as good signs instead of bad.
Sources: Adapted from Glenn Wisegarver, “The SaaS Addiction to Deferred Revenue,”
www.forbes.com/sites/forbesexecutivefinancecouncil/2017/04/07/the-saas-addiction-to-deferred-revenue (April 7, 2017).
Sales and Value-Added Taxes Payable
Most countries have a consumption tax. Consumption taxes are generally either a sales tax or a value-
added tax (VAT). The purpose of these taxes is to generate revenue for the government similar to the
company or personal income tax. These two taxes accomplish the same objective—to tax the final
consumer of the good or service. However, the two systems use different methods to accomplish this
objective.
Sales Taxes Payable
To illustrate the accounting for sales taxes, assume that Halo Supermarket sells loaves of bread to
consumers on a given day for €2,400. Assuming a sales tax rate of 10 percent, Halo Supermarket
makes the following entry to record the sale.
Cash
2,640
Sales Revenue
2,400
Sales Taxes Payable
240
In this situation, Halo Supermarket records a liability to provide for taxes collected from customers but
not yet remitted to the appropriate tax authority. At the proper time, Halo Supermarket remits the
€240 to the tax authority.
Sometimes, the sales tax collections credited to the liability account are not equal to the liability as
computed by the governmental formula. In such a case, companies make an adjustment of the liability
account by recognizing a gain or a loss on sales tax collections. Many companies do not segregate the
sales tax and the amount of the sale at the time of sale. Instead, the company credits both amounts in
total in the Sales Revenue account. Then, to reflect correctly the actual amount of sales and the liability
for sales taxes, the company debits the Sales Revenue account for the amount of the sales taxes due the
government on these sales and credits the Sales Taxes Payable account for the same amount.

--- Page 1058 ---
To illustrate, assume that the Sales Revenue account balance of €150,000 includes sales taxes of 4
percent. Thus, the amount recorded in the Sales Revenue account is comprised of the sales amount
plus sales tax of 4 percent of the sales amount. Sales therefore are €144,230.77 (€150,000 ÷ 1.04) and
the sales tax liability is €5,769.23 (€144,230.77 × 0.04, or €150,000 − €144,230.77). The following
entry records the amount due to the tax authority.
Sales Revenue
5,769.23
Sales Taxes Payable
5,769.23
Value-Added Taxes Payable
Value-added taxes (VAT) are used by tax authorities more than sales taxes (over 100 countries require
that companies collect a value-added tax). As indicated earlier, a value-added tax is a consumption
tax. This tax is placed on a product or service whenever value is added at a stage of production and at
final sale. A VAT is a cost to the end user, normally a private individual, similar to a sales tax.
However, a VAT should not be confused with a sales tax. A sales tax is collected only once at the
consumer’s point of purchase. No one else in the production or supply chain is involved in the
collection of the tax. In a VAT taxation system, the VAT is collected every time a business purchases
products from another business in the product’s supply chain. To illustrate, let’s return to the Halo
Supermarket example but now assume that a VAT is imposed rather than a sales tax. To understand
how a VAT works, we need to understand how the loaves of bread were made ready for purchase. Here
is what happened.
1. Hill Farms Wheat grows wheat and sells it to Sunshine Baking for €1,000. Hill Farms Wheat
makes the following entry to record the sale, assuming the VAT is 10 percent.
Cash
1,100
Sales Revenue
1,000
Value-Added Taxes Payable
100
Hill Farms Wheat then remits the €100 to the tax authority.
2. Sunshine Baking makes loaves of bread from this wheat and sells it to Halo Supermarket for
€2,000. Sunshine Baking makes the following entry to record the sale, assuming the VAT is 10
percent.
Cash
2,200
Sales Revenue
2,000
Value-Added Taxes Payable
200
Sunshine Baking then remits €100 to the government, not €200. The reason: Sunshine Baking has
already paid €100 to Hill Farms Wheat. At this point, the tax authority is only entitled to €100.
Sunshine Baking receives a credit for the VAT paid to Hill Farms Wheat, which reduces the VAT
payable.
3. Halo Supermarket sells the loaves of bread to consumers for €2,400. Halo Supermarket makes the
following entry to record the sale, assuming the VAT is 10 percent.
Cash
2,640
Sales Revenue
2,400
Value-Added Taxes Payable
240
Halo Supermarket then sends only €40 to the tax authority, because it deducts the €200 VAT
already paid to Sunshine Baking.
Who, then, in this supply chain ultimately pays the VAT of €240? The consumers. A summary of the
process is provided in Illustration 13.3.

--- Page 1059 ---
1. Hill Farms Wheat collected €100 of VAT and remitted this amount to the tax authority; it did not
have a net cash outlay for these taxes.
2. Sunshine Baking collected €200 of VAT but only remitted €100 to the tax authority because it
received credit for the €100 VAT that it paid to Hill Farms Wheat; it did not have a net cash outlay
for these taxes.
3. Halo Supermarket collected €240 of VAT but only remitted €40 to the tax authority because it
received credit for the €200 of VAT it paid to Sunshine Baking; it did not have a net cash outlay
for these taxes.
In summary, the total VAT collected and remitted by the companies in the supply chain is as follows.
VAT Collected VAT Remitted VAT Credited VAT Owed
Hill Farms Wheat
€100
€100
€
0
€0
Sunshine Baking
200
100
100
0
Halo Supermarket
240
40
200
0
Totals
€540
€240
€300
€0
So who actually pays the VAT? It is the consumers who bear the €240 VAT cost as part of their
purchase price, not the companies that produced and distributed the bread.
ILLUSTRATION 13.3 Who Pays the VAT?
An advantage of a VAT is that it is easier to collect than a sales tax because it has a self-correcting
mechanism built into the tax system. For example, look again at Sunshine Baking in Illustration 13.3.
If Sunshine Baking is considering not paying the VAT, it knows that Halo Supermarket will report its
purchase from Sunshine Baking in order to claim its credit. As a result, the tax authority has records
that a purchase was made and therefore could charge Sunshine Baking with fraud if it fails to remit the
VAT. A sales tax does not have this self-correcting mechanism and is thus easier to avoid. For example,
if the sales tax is high, consumers can buy goods in different jurisdictions than their residence, or
pretend to be a business in the supply chain rather than the ultimate consumer. On the other hand, a
disadvantage of a VAT is the increased amount of record-keeping involved in implementing the system.
For example, companies must keep track of credits for VAT payments and adjust Inventory (or Cost of
Goods Sold) when remitting VAT taxes.
Income Taxes Payable
Most income tax varies in proportion to the amount of annual income. Using the best information and
advice available, a business must prepare an income tax return and compute the income taxes payable
resulting from the operations of the current period. Companies should classify as a current liability the
taxes payable on net income, as computed per the tax return. However, in many countries
proprietorships and partnerships are not taxable entities. Because the individual proprietor and the
members of a partnership are subject to personal income taxes on their share of the business’s taxable
income, income tax liabilities do not appear on the financial statements of proprietorships and
partnerships.
Most companies must make periodic tax payments throughout the year to the appropriate government
agency. These payments are based upon estimates of the total annual tax liability. As the estimated
total tax liability changes, the periodic payments also change. If, in a later year, the taxing authority
assesses an additional tax on the income of an earlier year, the company should credit Income Taxes
Payable and charge the related debit to current operations.
Differences between taxable income under the tax laws and accounting income under IFRS sometimes
occur. Because of these differences, the amount of income taxes payable to the government in any

--- Page 1060 ---
given year may differ substantially from income tax expense as reported on the financial statements.
Chapter 19 is devoted solely to income tax matters and presents an extensive discussion of this
complex topic.
Employee-Related Liabilities
Companies also report as a current liability amounts owed to employees for salaries or wages at the
end of an accounting period. In addition, they often also report as current liabilities the following items
related to employee compensation.
1. Payroll deductions.
2. Compensated absences.
3. Bonuses.
Payroll Deductions
The most common types of payroll deductions are taxes, insurance premiums, employee savings, and
union dues. To the extent that a company has not remitted the amounts deducted to the
proper authority at the end of the accounting period, it should recognize them as current
liabilities.
Social Security Taxes
Most governments provide a level of social benefits (for retirement, unemployment, income, disability,
and medical benefits) to individuals and families. The benefits are generally funded from taxes
assessed on both the employer and the employees. These taxes are often referred to as Social
Security taxes or Social Welfare taxes. Employers collect the employee’s share of this tax by
deducting it from the employee’s gross pay, and remit it to the government along with their share. The
government often taxes both the employer and the employee at the same rate. Companies should
report the amount of unremitted employee and employer Social Security tax on gross
wages paid as a current liability.
Income Tax Withholding
Income tax laws generally require employers to withhold from each employee’s pay the applicable
income tax due on those wages. The employer computes the amount of income tax to withhold
according to a government-prescribed formula or withholding tax table. That amount depends on the
length of the pay period and each employee’s taxable wages, marital status, and claimed dependents.
Illustration 13.4 summarizes payroll deductions and liabilities.
ILLUSTRATION 13.4 Summary of Payroll Liabilities
Payroll Deductions Example
Assume a weekly payroll of $10,000 entirely subject to Social Security taxes (8 percent), with income
tax withholding of $1,320 and union dues of $88 deducted. The company records the wages and
salaries paid and the employee payroll deductions as follows.
Salaries and Wages Expense
10,000

--- Page 1061 ---
Withholding Taxes Payable
1,320
Social Security Taxes Payable
800
Union Dues Payable
88
Cash
7,792
It records the employer payroll taxes as follows.
Payroll Tax Expense
800
Social Security Taxes Payable
800
The employer must remit to the government its share of Social Security tax along with the amount of
Social Security tax deducted from each employee’s gross compensation. It should record all unremitted
employer Social Security taxes as payroll tax expense and payroll tax payable.4
Compensated Absences
Compensated absences are paid absences from employment—such as vacation, illness, and
maternity, paternity, and jury leaves.5 The following considerations are relevant to the accounting for
compensated absences.
Vested rights exist when an employer has an obligation to make payment to an employee even after
terminating his or her employment. Thus, vested rights are not contingent on an employee’s future
service. Accumulated rights are those that employees can carry forward to future periods if not used
in the period in which earned. For example, assume that you earn four days of vacation pay as of
December 31, the end of your employer’s fiscal year. Company policy is that you will be paid for this
vacation time even if you terminate employment. In this situation, your four days of vacation pay are
vested, and your employer must accrue the amount.
Now assume that your vacation days are not vested but that you can carry the four days over into later
periods. Although the rights are not vested, they are accumulated rights for which the employer must
make an accrual. However, the amount of the accrual is adjusted to allow for estimated forfeitures due
to turnover.
Non-accumulating rights do not carry forward; they lapse if not used. As a result, a company does
not recognize a liability or expense until the time of absence (benefit). Thus, if an employee takes a
vacation day during a month and it is non-accumulating, the vacation day is an expense in that month.
Similarly, a benefit such as a maternity or paternity leave is contingent upon a future event and does
not accumulate. Therefore, these costs are recognized only when the absence commences. [4]
A modification of the general rules relates to the issue of sick pay. If sick pay benefits vest, a company
must accrue them. If sick pay benefits accumulate but do not vest, a company may choose whether to
accrue them. Why this distinction? Companies may administer compensation designated as sick pay in
one of two ways. In some companies, employees receive sick pay only if illness causes their absence.
Therefore, these companies may or may not accrue a liability because its payment depends on future
employee illness. Other companies allow employees to accumulate unused sick pay and take
compensated time off from work even when not ill. For this type of sick pay, a company must accrue a
liability because the company will pay it, regardless of whether employees become ill.
Companies should recognize the expense and related liability for compensated absences
in the year earned by employees. For example, if new employees receive rights to two weeks’ paid
vacation at the beginning of their second year of employment, a company considers the vacation pay to
be earned during the first year of employment.
What rate should a company use to accrue the compensated absence cost—the current rate or an
expected rate? IFRS recommends the use of the expected rate. However, companies will likely use the
current rather than expected rates because future rates are not known. To illustrate, assume that
Amutron NV began operations on January 1, 2022. The company employs 10 individuals and pays each

--- Page 1062 ---
€480 per week. Employees earned 20 unused vacation weeks in 2022. In 2023, the employees used the
vacation weeks, but now they each earn €540 per week. Amutron accrues the accumulated vacation pay
on December 31, 2022, as follows.
Salaries and Wages Expense
9,600
Salaries and Wages Payable (€480 × 20)
9,600
At December 31, 2022, the company reports on its statement of financial position a liability of €9,600.
In 2023, it records the payment of vacation pay as follows.
Salaries and Wages Payable 9,600
Salaries and Wages Expense 1,200
Cash (€540 × 20)
10,800
In 2023, the use of the vacation weeks extinguishes the liability. Note that Amutron records the
difference between the amount of cash paid and the reduction in the liability account as an adjustment
to Salaries and Wages Expense in the period when paid. This difference arises because it accrues the
liability account at the rates of pay in effect during the period when employees earned the
compensated time. The cash paid, however, depends on the rates in effect during the period when
employees used the compensated time. If Amutron used the future rates of pay to compute the accrual
in 2022, then the cash paid in 2023 would equal the liability.6
Profit-Sharing and Bonus Plans
Many companies give a bonus to certain or all employees in addition to their regular salaries or wages.
Frequently, the bonus amount depends on the company’s yearly profit. A company may consider
bonus payments to employees as additional salaries and wages and should include them as a
deduction in determining the net income for the year.
To illustrate the entries for an employee bonus, assume that Palmer Inc. shows income for the year
2022 of $100,000. It will pay out bonuses of $10,700 in January 2023. Palmer makes an adjusting
entry dated December 31, 2022, to record the bonuses as follows.
Salaries and Wages Expense
10,700
Salaries and Wages Payable
10,700
In January 2023, when Palmer pays the bonus, it makes this journal entry:
Salaries and Wages Payable 10,700
Cash
10,700
Palmer should show the expense account in the income statement as an operating expense. The
liability, Salaries and Wages Payable, is usually payable within a short period of time.
Companies should include it as a current liability in the statement of financial position.
An obligation under a profit-sharing or bonus plan must be accounted for as an expense and not a
distribution of profit, since it results from employee service and not a transaction with owners.
Similar to bonus agreements are contractual agreements for conditional expenses. Examples would
be agreements covering rents or royalty payments conditional on the amount of revenues recognized or
the quantity of product produced or extracted. Conditional expenses based on revenues or units
produced are usually less difficult to compute than bonus arrangements.
For example, assume that a lease calls for a fixed rent payment of $500 per month and 1 percent of all
sales over $300,000 per year. The company’s annual rent obligation would amount to $6,000 plus
$0.01 of each dollar of revenue over $300,000. In other examples, a royalty agreement may give to a
patent owner $1 for every ton of product resulting from the patented process, or give to a mineral
rights owner $0.50 on every barrel of oil extracted. As the company produces or extracts each
additional unit of product, it creates an additional obligation, usually a current liability.

--- Page 1063 ---
Provisions
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Explain the accounting for different types of provisions.
A provision is a liability of uncertain timing or amount (sometimes referred to as an estimated
liability). Provisions are very common and may be reported as either current or non-current depending
on the date of expected payment. [5] Common types of provisions are obligations related to litigation,
warrantees or product guarantees, business restructurings, and environmental damage.7
For example, Petronas (MYS) reported RM35,266 million related to a provision for decommissioning
oil and gas properties. Nokia (FIN) reported €195 million for warranties, intellectual property
infringement, and restructuring costs. And Adecoagro SA (BRA) reported R$3,620,000 for labor,
legal, and other claims.
The difference between a provision and other liabilities (such as accounts or notes payable, salaries
payable, and dividends payable) is that a provision has greater uncertainty about the timing or
amount of the future expenditure required to settle the obligation. For example, when
Siemens AG (DEU) reports an accounts payable, there is an invoice or formal agreement as to the
existence and the amount of the liability. Similarly, when Siemens accrues interest payable, the timing
and the amount are known.8
Recognition of a Provision
Companies accrue an expense and related liability for a provision only if the following three conditions
are met.
1. A company has a present obligation (legal or constructive) as a result of a past event;
2. It is probable that an outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will be required to settle
the obligation; and
3. A reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation.
If these three conditions are not met, no provision is recognized. [6]
In applying the first condition, the past event (often referred to as the past obligatory event) must have
occurred. In applying the second condition, the term probable is defined as “more likely than not to
occur.” This phrase is interpreted to mean the probability of occurrence is greater than 50 percent. If
the probability is 50 percent or less, the provision is not recognized.
Recognition Examples
We provide three examples to illustrate when a provision should be recognized. It is assumed for each
of these examples that a reliable estimate of the amount of the obligation can be determined.
Illustration 13.5 presents the first example in which a company has a legal obligation to honor its
warranties. A legal obligation generally results from a contract or legislation.

--- Page 1064 ---
Warranty
Facts: Santos SA gives warranties to its customers related to the sale of its electrical products. The
warranties are for three years from the date of sale. Based on past experience, it is probable that there
will be some claims under the warranties.
Question: Should Santos recognize at the statement of financial position date a provision
for the warranty costs yet to be settled?
Solution: (1) The warranty is a present obligation as a result of a past obligating event—the past
obligating event is the sale of the product with a warranty, which gives rise to a legal obligation. (2)
The warranty results in the outflow of resources embodying benefits in settlement—it is probable
that there will be some claims related to these warranties. Santos should recognize the provision
based on past experience.
ILLUSTRATION 13.5 Recognition of a Provision—Warranty
A constructive obligation is an obligation that derives from a company’s actions where:
1. By an established pattern of past practice, published policies, or a sufficiently specific current
statement, the company has indicated to other parties that it will accept certain responsibilities;
and
2. As a result, the company has created a valid expectation on the part of those other parties that it
will discharge those responsibilities.
The second example, presented in Illustration 13.6, demonstrates how a constructive obligation is
reported.
Refunds
Facts: Christian Dior (FRA) has a policy of refunding purchases to dissatisfied customers even
though it is under no legal obligation to do so. Its policy of making refunds is generally known.
Question: Should Christian Dior record a provision for these refunds?
Solution: (1) The refunds are a present obligation as a result of a past obligating event—the sale of
the product. This sale gives rise to a constructive obligation because the conduct of the company has
created a valid expectation on the part of its customers that it will refund purchases. (2) The refunds
result in the outflow of resources in settlement—it is probable that a proportion of goods will be
returned for refund. A provision is recognized for the best estimate of the costs of refunds.
ILLUSTRATION 13.6 Recognition of a Provision—Refunds
The third example, the case of Wm Morrison Supermarkets (GBR) in Illustration 13.7, presents
a situation in which the recognition of the provision depends on the probability of future payment.

--- Page 1065 ---
Lawsuit
Facts: Assume that an employee filed a £1,000,000 lawsuit on November 30, 2022, against Wm
Morrison Supermarkets for damages suffered when the employee slipped and suffered a serious
injury at one of the company’s facilities. Morrison’s lawyers believe that Morrison will not lose the
lawsuit, putting the probability of future payments at less than 50 percent.
Question: Should Morrison recognize a provision for legal claims at December 31, 2022?
Solution: Although a past obligating event has occurred (the injury leading to the filing of the
lawsuit), it is not probable (more likely than not) that Morrison will have to pay any damages.
Morrison therefore does not need to record a provision. If, on the other hand, Morrison’s lawyer
determined that it is probable that the company will lose the lawsuit, then Morrison should
recognize a provision at December 31, 2022.
ILLUSTRATION 13.7 Recognition of a Provision—Lawsuit
Measurement of Provisions
How does a company like Toyota (JPN), for example, determine the amount to report for its warranty
cost on its automobiles? How does a company like Carrefour (FRA) determine its liability for
customer refunds? How does Novartis (CHE) determine the amount to report for a lawsuit that it
probably will lose? And how does a company like Total SA (FRA) determine the amount to report as a
provision for its remediation costs related to environmental clean-up?
IFRS provides an answer: The amount recognized should be the best estimate of the expenditure
required to settle the present obligation. Best estimate represents the amount that a company
would pay to settle the obligation at the statement of financial position date. [7]
In determining the best estimate, the management of a company must use judgment, based on past or
similar transactions, discussions with experts, and any other pertinent information. Here is how this
judgment might be used in three different types of situations to arrive at best estimate:
Toyota warranties. Toyota sells many cars and must make an estimate of the number of
warranty repairs and related costs it will incur. Because it is dealing with a large population of
automobiles, it is often best to weight all possible outcomes by associated probabilities. For
example, it might determine that 80 percent of its cars will not have any warranty cost, 12 percent
will have substantial costs, and 8 percent will have a much smaller cost. In this case, by weighting
all the possible outcomes by their associated probabilities, Toyota arrives at an expected value
for its warranty liability.
Carrefour refunds. Carrefour sells many items at varying selling prices. Refunds to customers
for products sold may be viewed as a continuous range of refunds, with each point in the range
having the same probability of occurrence. In this case, the midpoint in the range can be used
as the basis for measuring the amount of the refunds.
Novartis lawsuit. Large companies like Novartis are involved in numerous litigation issues
related to their products. Where a single obligation such as a lawsuit is being measured, the most
likely outcome of the lawsuit may be the best estimate of the liability.
In each of these situations, the measurement of the liability should consider the time value of money,
if material. In addition, future events that may have an impact on the measurement of the costs should
be considered. For example, a company like Total SA, which might have high remediation costs related
to environmental clean-up, may consider future technological innovations that reduce future
remediation costs.

--- Page 1066 ---
Common Types of Provisions
Here are some common areas for which provisions may be recognized in the financial statements:
1. Lawsuits
4. Environmental
2. Warranties
5. Onerous contracts
3. Consideration payable 6. Restructuring
Although companies generally report only one current and one non-current amount for provisions in
the statement of financial position, IFRS also requires extensive disclosure related to provisions in the
notes to the financial statements. Companies do not record or report in the notes to the financial
statements general risk contingencies inherent in business operations (e.g., the possibility of war,
strike, uninsurable catastrophes, or a business recession). [8]
Litigation Provisions
Companies must consider the following factors, among others, in determining whether to record a
liability with respect to pending or threatened litigation and actual or possible claims and
assessments.
1. The time period in which the underlying cause of action occurred.
2. The probability of an unfavorable outcome.
3. The ability to make a reasonable estimate of the amount of loss.
To report a loss and a liability in the financial statements, the cause for litigation must have
occurred on or before the date of the financial statements. It does not matter that the company
became aware of the existence or possibility of the lawsuit or claims after the date of the financial
statements but before issuing them. To evaluate the probability of an unfavorable outcome, a company
considers the following: the nature of the litigation, the progress of the case, the opinion of legal
counsel, its own and others’ experience in similar cases, and any management response to the lawsuit.
With respect to unfiled suits and unasserted claims and assessments, a company must
determine (1) the degree of probability that a suit may be filed or a claim or assessment may be
asserted, and (2) the probability of an unfavorable outcome. For example, assume that a regulatory
body investigates the Nawtee Company for restraint of trade and institutes enforcement proceedings.
Private claims of triple damages for redress often follow such proceedings. In this case, Nawtee must
determine the probability of the claims being asserted and the probability of triple damages being
awarded. If both are probable, if the loss is reasonably estimable, and if the cause for action is dated on
or before the date of the financial statements, then Nawtee should accrue the liability.
Companies can seldom predict the outcome of pending litigation, however, with any assurance. And,
even if evidence available at the statement of financial position date does not favor the company, it is
hardly reasonable to expect the company to publish in its financial statements a dollar estimate of the
probable negative outcome. Such specific disclosures might weaken the company’s position in the
dispute and encourage the plaintiff to intensify its efforts. As a result, many companies provide a
general provision for the costs expected to be incurred without relating the disclosure to any specific
lawsuit or set of lawsuits. Illustration 13.8 provides the disclosure by Nestlé Group (CHE) related
to its litigation claims.

--- Page 1067 ---
Nestlé Group
Notes to the financial statements (partial)
Legal and tax
Legal provisions have been set up to cover legal and administrative proceedings that arise in the
ordinary course of business. Tax provisions include disputes and uncertainties on non-income taxes
(mainly VAT and sales taxes). It covers numerous separate cases whose detailed disclosure could be
detrimental to the Group interests. The Group does not believe that any of these cases will have an
adverse impact on its financial position. The timing of outflows is uncertain as it depends upon the
outcome of these cases. Group Management does not believe it is possible to make assumptions on
the evolution of the cases beyond the balance sheet date.
ILLUSTRATION 13.8 Litigation Disclosure
Warranty Provisions
A warranty (product guarantee) is a promise made by a seller to a buyer to make good on a
deficiency of quantity, quality, or performance in a product. Manufacturers commonly use it as a sales
promotion technique. Automakers, for instance, “hype” their sales by extending their new-car warranty
to seven years or 100,000 miles. For a specified period of time following the date of sale to the
consumer, the manufacturer may promise to bear all or part of the cost of replacing defective parts, to
perform any necessary repairs or servicing without charge, to refund the purchase price, or even to
“double your money back.”
Warranties and guarantees entail future costs. These additional costs, sometimes called “after costs” or
“post-sale costs,” frequently are significant. Although the future cost is indefinite as to amount, due
date, and even customer, a liability is probable in most cases. Companies should recognize this liability
in the accounts if they can reasonably estimate it. The estimated amount of the liability includes all the
costs that the company will incur after sale and delivery and that are incidental to the correction of
defects or deficiencies required under the warranty provisions. Thus, warranty costs are a classic
example of a provision.
Companies often provide one of two types of warranties to customers:
1. Warranty that the product meets agreed-upon specifications in the contract at the time the product
is sold. This type of warranty is included in the sales price of a company’s product and is often
referred to as an assurance-type warranty.
2. Warranty that provides an additional service beyond the assurance-type warranty. This warranty is
not included in the sales price of the product and is referred to as a service-type warranty. As a
result, it is recorded as a separate performance obligation.
Assurance-Type Warranty
Companies do not record a separate performance obligation for assurance-type warranties. This type of
warranty is nothing more than a quality guarantee that the good or service is free from defects at the
point of sale. These types of obligations should be expensed in the period the goods are provided or
services performed. In addition, the company should record a warranty liability. The estimated amount
of the liability includes all the costs that the company will incur after sale due to the correction of
defects or deficiencies required under the warranty provisions. Illustration 13.9 provides an example
of an assurance-type warranty.

--- Page 1068 ---
Assurance-Type Warranty
Facts: Denson Machinery Company begins production of a new machine in July 2022 and sells 100 of
these machines for $5,000 cash by year-end for a total sales revenue of $500,000 (100 × $5,000).
Each machine is under warranty for 1 year. Denson estimates, based on past experience with similar
machines, that the warranty cost will average $200 per unit for a total expected warranty expense of
$20,000 (100 × $200). Further, as a result of parts replacements and services performed in
compliance with machinery warranties, it incurs $4,000 in warranty costs in 2022 and $16,000 in
2023.
Question: What are the journal entries for the sale and the related warranty costs for
2022 and 2023?
Solution: For the sale of the machines and related warranty costs in 2022, the entries are as follows.
1. To recognize sales of machines:
July–December 2022
Cash
500,000
Sales Revenue
500,000
2. To record payment for warranty expenditures incurred in 2022:
July–December 2022
Warranty Expense
4,000
Cash, Inventory, Accrued Payroll
4,000
3. The adjusting entry to record estimated warranty expense and warranty liability for expected
warranty claims in 2023:
December 31, 2022
Warranty Expense
16,000
Warranty Liability
16,000
As a consequence of this adjusting entry at December 31, 2022, the statement of financial
position reports a warranty liability (current) of $16,000 ($20,000 − $4,000). The income
statement for 2022 reports sales revenue of $500,000 and warranty expense of $20,000.
4. To record payment for warranty expenditures incurred in 2023 related to 2022 machinery sales:
January 1–December 31, 2023
Warranty Liability
16,000
Cash, Inventory, Accrued Payroll
16,000
At the end of 2023, no warranty liability is reported for the machinery sold in 2022.
ILLUSTRATION 13.9 Accounting for an Assurance-Type Warranty
Service-Type Warranty
A warranty is sometimes sold separately from the product. For example, when you purchase a
television, you are entitled to an assurance-type warranty. You also will undoubtedly be offered an
extended warranty on the product at an additional cost, referred to as a service-type warranty. In most

--- Page 1069 ---
cases, service-type warranties provide the customer a service beyond fixing defects that existed at the
time of sale.
Companies record a service-type warranty as a separate performance obligation. For example, in the
case of the television, the seller recognizes the sale of the television with the assurance-type warranty
separately from the sale of the service-type warranty. The sale of the service-type warranty is usually
recorded in an Unearned Warranty Revenue account.
Companies then recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the period the service-type warranty is
in effect. Companies only defer and amortize costs that vary with and are directly related to the sale of
the contracts (mainly commissions). Companies expense employees’ salaries and wages, advertising,
and general and administrative expenses because these costs occur even if the company did not sell the
service-type warranty. Illustration 13.10 presents an example of both an assurance-type and service-
type warranty.

--- Page 1070 ---
Warranties
Facts: You purchase an automobile from Hamlin Auto for €30,000 on January 2, 2022. Hamlin
estimates the assurance-type warranty costs on the automobile to be €700 (Hamlin will pay for
repairs for the first 36,000 kilometers or 3 years, whichever comes first). You also purchase for €900
a service-type warranty for an additional 3 years or 36,000 kilometers. Hamlin incurs warranty costs
related to the assurance-type warranty of €500 in 2022 and €100 in 2023 and 2024. Hamlin records
revenue on the service-type warranty on a straight-line basis.
Question: What entries should Hamlin make in 2022 and 2025?
Solution:
1. To record the sale of the automobile and related warranties:
January 2, 2022
Cash (€30,000 + €900)
30,900
Unearned Warranty Revenue
900
Sales Revenue
30,000
2. To record warranty expenditures incurred in 2022:
January 2–December 31, 2022
Warranty Expense
500
Cash, Inventory, Accrued Payroll
500
3. The adjusting entry to record estimated warranty expense and warranty liability for expected
assurance warranty claims in 2023:
December 31, 2022
Warranty Expense
200
Warranty Liability
200
As a consequence of this adjusting entry at December 31, 2022, the statement of financial
position reports a warranty liability of €200 (€700 – €500) for the assurance-type warranty.
The income statement for 2022 reports sales revenue of €30,000 and warranty expense of
€700.
4. To record revenue recognized in 2025 on the service-type warranty:
December 31, 2025
Unearned Warranty Revenue (€900 ÷ 3) 300
Warranty Revenue
300
Warranty expenditures under the service-type warranty will be expensed as incurred in 2025–
2027.
ILLUSTRATION 13.10 Assurance-Type and Service-Type Warranties
Consideration Payable
Companies often make payments (provide consideration) to their customers as part of a revenue
arrangement. Consideration paid or payable may include discounts, volume rebates, free products, or
services. For example, numerous companies offer premiums (either on a limited or continuing basis)
to customers in return for box tops, certificates, coupons, labels, or wrappers. The premium may be

--- Page 1071 ---
silverware, dishes, a small appliance, a toy, or free transportation. Also, printed coupons that can be
redeemed for a cash discount on items purchased are extremely popular (see Underlying Concepts).
Another popular marketing innovation is the cash rebate, which the buyer can obtain by returning
the store receipt and a rebate coupon to the manufacturer.
Underlying Concepts
Premiums and coupons are loss contingencies that satisfy the conditions necessary for a liability.
Regarding the income statement, the expense recognition principle requires that companies
report the related expense in the period in which the sale occurs.
Companies offer premiums, coupon offers, and rebates to stimulate sales. And to the extent that the
premiums reflect a material right promised to the customer, a performance obligation exists and
should be recorded as a liability. However, the period that benefits is not necessarily the period in
which the company pays the premium. At the end of the accounting period, many premium offers may
be outstanding and must be redeemed when presented in subsequent periods. In order to reflect the
existing current liability, the company estimates the number of outstanding premium offers that
customers will present for redemption. The company then charges the cost of premium offers to
Premium Expense. It credits the outstanding obligations to an account titled Premium Liability.
Illustration 13.11 provides an example of the accounting for consideration payable using provisions.9

--- Page 1072 ---
Consideration Payable
Facts: Fluffy Cake Mix Ltd. sells boxes of cake mix for £3 per box. In addition, Fluffy Cake Mix offers
its customers a large durable mixing bowl in exchange for £1 and 10 box tops. The mixing bowl costs
Fluffy Cake Mix £2, and the company estimates that customers will redeem 60 percent of the box
tops. The premium offer began in June 2022. During 2022, Fluffy Cake Mix purchased 20,000 mixing
bowls at £2, sold 300,000 boxes of cake mix for £3 per box, and redeemed 60,000 box tops.
Question: What entries should Fluffy Cake Mix record in 2022?
Solution:
1. To record purchase of 20,000 mixing bowls at £2 per bowl in 2022:
Inventory of Premiums (20,000 mixing bowls × £2) 40,000
Cash
40,000
2. The entry to record the sale of the cake mix boxes in 2022 is as follows:
Cash (300,000 boxes of cake mix × £3) 900,000
Sales Revenue
900,000
3. To record the actual redemption of 60,000 box tops, the receipt of £1 per 10 box tops, and the
delivery of the mixing bowls:
Cash [(60,000 ÷ 10) × £1]
6,000
Premium Expense
6,000
Inventory of Premiums [(60,000 ÷ 10) × £2]
12,000
4. The adjusting entry to record additional premium expense and the estimated premium liability
at December 31, 2022, is as follows:
Premium Expense
12,000
Premium Liability
12,000*
*Computation of Premium Liability at 12/31/22:
Total box tops sold in 2022
300,000
Estimated redemptions
×.60
Total estimated redemptions
180,000
Cost of estimated redemptions [(180,000 box tops ÷ 10) × (£2 – £1)] £18,000
Redemptions to date
(6,000)
Liability at 12/31/22
£12,000
The December 31, 2022, statement of financial position of Fluffy Cake Mix reports Premium
inventory of £28,000 (£40,000 − £12,000) as a current asset and Premium Liability of £12,000 as a
current liability. The 2022 income statement reports £18,000 (£6,000 + £12,000) premium expense
as a selling expense.
Note the solution is based on the assumption that the mixing bowls represent an immaterial item and are therefore not accounted for
as a separate performance obligation. We will cover accounting for transactions with multiple performance obligations in Chapter 18.
You should make the same assumptions related to premiums as you do the homework problems for this chapter.
ILLUSTRATION 13.11 Accounting for Consideration Payable

--- Page 1073 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Frequent Flyers
Numerous companies offer premiums to customers in the form of a promise of future goods or
services as an incentive for purchases today. Premium plans that have widespread adoption are
the frequent-flyer programs used by all major airlines. On the basis of mileage accumulated,
frequent-flyer members receive discounted or free airline tickets. Airline customers can earn
miles toward free travel by making long-distance phone calls, staying in hotels, and charging
gasoline and groceries on a credit card. Those free tickets represent an enormous potential
liability because people using them may displace paying passengers.
When airlines first started offering frequent-flyer bonuses, everyone assumed that they could
accommodate the free-ticket holders with otherwise empty seats. That made the additional cost of
the program so minimal that airlines didn’t accrue it or report the small liability. But, as more and
more paying passengers have been crowded off flights by frequent-flyer awardees, the loss of
revenues has grown enormously. For example, Qantas Airways Limited (AUS) recently
reported a liability of $5,781 million for advance ticket sales, including frequent-flyer obligations.
Environmental Provisions
Estimates to clean up existing toxic waste sites are substantial. In addition, cost estimates of cleaning
up our air and preventing future deterioration of the environment run even higher.
In many industries, the construction and operation of long-lived assets involves obligations for the
retirement of those assets. When a mining company opens up a strip mine, it may also commit to
restore the land once it completes mining. Similarly, when an oil company erects an offshore drilling
platform, it may be legally obligated to dismantle and remove the platform at the end of its useful life.
Accounting Recognition of Environmental Liabilities
As with other provisions, a company must recognize an environmental liability when it has an
existing legal obligation associated with the retirement of a long-lived asset and when it can reasonably
estimate the amount of the liability.
Obligating events.
Examples of existing legal obligations that require recognition of a liability include but are not limited
to:
Decommissioning nuclear facilities.
Dismantling, restoring, and reclamation of oil and gas properties.
Certain closure, reclamation, and removal costs of mining facilities.
Closure and postclosure costs of landfills.
In order to capture the benefits of these long-lived assets, the company is generally legally
obligated for the costs associated with retirement of the asset, whether the company hires
another party to perform the retirement activities or performs the activities with its own
workforce and equipment. Environmental liabilities give rise to various recognition patterns. For
example, the obligation may arise at the outset of the asset’s use (e.g., erection of an oil rig), or it may
build over time (e.g., a landfill that expands over time).

--- Page 1074 ---
Measurement.
A company initially measures an environmental liability at the best estimate of its future costs. The
estimate should reflect the amount a company would pay in an active market to settle its obligation
(essentially fair value). While active markets do not exist for many environmental liabilities,
companies should estimate fair value based on the best information available. Such information could
include market prices of similar liabilities, if available. Alternatively, companies may use present value
techniques to estimate fair value.
Recognition and allocation.
To record an environmental liability in the financial statements, a company includes the cost
associated with the environmental liability in the carrying amount of the related long-lived asset, and
records a liability for the same amount. It records the environmental costs as part of the related asset
because these costs are tied to operating the asset and are necessary to prepare the asset for its
intended use. Therefore, the specific asset (e.g., mine, drilling platform, nuclear power plant) should be
increased because the future economic benefit comes from the use of this productive asset.
Companies should not record the capitalized environmental costs in a separate account
because there is no future economic benefit that can be associated with these costs alone.
In subsequent periods, companies allocate the cost of the asset to expense over the period of the
related asset’s useful life. Companies may use the straight-line method for this allocation, as well as
other systematic and rational allocations.
Example of accounting provisions.
To illustrate the accounting for these types of environmental liabilities, assume that on January 1,
2022, Wildcat Oil Company erected an oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico. Wildcat is legally required to
dismantle and remove the platform at the end of its useful life, estimated to be five years. Wildcat
estimates that dismantling and removal will cost $1,000,000. Based on a 10 percent discount rate, the
fair value of the environmental liability is estimated to be $620,920 ($1,000,000 × .62092). Wildcat
records this liability as follows.
January 1, 2022
Drilling Platform
620,920
Environmental Liability
620,920
During the life of the asset, Wildcat allocates the asset cost to expense. Using the straight-line method,
Wildcat makes the following entries to record this expense.
December 31, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2025, 2026
Depreciation Expense ($620,920 ÷ 5)
124,184
Accumulated Depreciation—Plant Assets
124,184
In addition, Wildcat must accrue interest expense each period. Wildcat records interest expense and
the related increase in the environmental liability on December 31, 2022, as follows.
December 31, 2022
Interest Expense ($620,920 × .10) 62,092
Environmental Liability
62,092
On January 10, 2027, Wildcat contracts with Rig Reclaimers, Inc. to dismantle the platform at a
contract price of $995,000. Wildcat makes the following journal entry to record settlement of the
liability.

--- Page 1075 ---
January 10, 2027
January 10, 2027
Environmental Liability
1,000,000
Gain on Settlement of Environmental Liability
5,000
Cash
995,000
As indicated, as a result of the discounting, Wildcat incurs two types of costs: (1) an operating cost
related to depreciation expense, and (2) a finance cost related to interest expense. The recording of the
interest expense is often referred to as “unwinding the discount,” which refers to the fact that the
obligation was discounted as a result of present value computations. This discount can be substantial.
For example, BP (GBR) in a recent year changed its policy related to the appropriate discount rate to
use to estimate its provision for decommissioning and environmental costs. The 0.5 percent decrease
in the discount rate resulted in a $2.415 billion decrease in the liability.
A company like Wildcat can consider future events when evaluating the measurement of the liability.
For example, a technological development that will make restoration less expensive and is virtually
certain to happen should be considered. Generally, future events are limited to those that are virtually
certain to happen, as well as technology advances or proposed legislation that will impact future costs.

--- Page 1076 ---
Evolving Issue
Greenhouse Gases: Let’s Be Standard-Setters
Here is your chance to determine what to do about a very fundamental issue—how to account for
greenhouse gases (GHG), often referred to as carbon emissions. Many governments are trying a
market-based system, in which companies pay for an excessive amount of carbon emissions put
into the atmosphere. In this market-based system, companies are granted carbon allowance
permits. Each permit allows them to discharge, as an example, one metric ton of carbon dioxide
(CO2). In some cases, companies may receive a number of these permits free—in other situations,
they must pay for them. Other approaches require companies to pay only when they exceed a
certain amount.
The question is how to account for these permits and related liabilities. For example, what
happens when the permits issued by the government are free? Should an asset and revenue be
reported? And if an asset is recorded, should the debit be to an intangible asset or inventory? Also,
should the company recognize a liability related to its pollution? And how do we account for
companies that have to purchase permits because they have exceeded their allowance? Two views
seem to have emerged. The first is referred to as the net liability approach. In this approach, a
company does not recognize an asset or liability. A company only recognizes a liability once GHG
exceed the permits granted.
To illustrate, Holton Refinery receives permits on January 1, 2022, representing the right to emit
10,000 tons of GHG for the year 2022. Other data:
The market price of each permit at date of issuance is €10 per ton.
During the year, Holton emits 12,000 tons.
The market price for a permit is €16 per ton at December 31, 2022.
Under the net liability approach, Holton records only a liability of €32,000 for the additional
amount that it must pay for the 2,000 permits it must purchase at €16 per ton.
Another approach is referred to as the government grant approach. In this approach, permits
granted by the government are recorded at their fair value based on the initial price of €10 per
ton. The asset recorded is an intangible asset. At the same time, an unearned revenue account is
credited, which is subsequently recognized in income over the 2022 year. During 2022, a liability
and a related emission expense of €132,000 is recognized (10,000 tons × €10 + 2,000 tons × €16).
The following chart compares the results of each approach on the financial statements.
So what do you think—net liability or government grant approach? As indicated, companies
presently can report this information either way, plus some other variants which were not
mentioned here. Please feel free to contact the IASB regarding your views.

--- Page 1077 ---
Onerous Contract Provisions
Sometimes, companies have what are referred to as onerous contracts. These contracts are ones in
which “the unavoidable costs of meeting the obligations exceed the economic benefits expected to be
received.” [9] An example of an onerous contract is a loss recognized on unfavorable non-cancelable
purchase commitments related to inventory items (discussed in Chapter 9).
To illustrate another situation, assume that Sumart Sports operates profitably in a factory that it has
leased and on which it pays monthly rentals. Sumart decides to relocate its operations to another
facility. However, the lease on the old facility continues for the next three years. Unfortunately, Sumart
cannot cancel the lease, nor will it be able to sublet the factory to another party. The expected costs to
satisfy this onerous contract are €200,000. In this case, Sumart makes the following entry.
Loss on Lease Contract
200,000
Lease Contract Liability
200,000
The expected costs should reflect the least net cost of exiting from the contract, which is the lower of
(1) the cost of fulfilling the contract, or (2) the compensation or penalties arising from failure to fulfill
the contract.
To illustrate, assume the same facts as above for the Sumart example. The expected costs to fulfill the
contract are €200,000. However, Sumart can cancel the lease by paying a penalty of €175,000. In this
case, Sumart should record the liability at €175,000.
Illustration 13.12 indicates how Nestlé Group (CHE) discloses onerous contracts.
Nestlé Group
Notes to the financial statements (partial)
Other Provisions
Other provisions are mainly constituted by onerous contracts and various damage claims having
occurred during the year but not covered by insurance companies. Onerous contracts result from
termination of contracts or supply agreements above market prices in which the unavoidable costs of
meeting the obligations under the contracts exceed the economic benefits expected to be received or
for which no benefits are expected to be received.
ILLUSTRATION 13.12 Onerous Contract Disclosure
Restructuring Provisions
The accounting for restructuring provisions is controversial. Once companies make a decision to
restructure part of their operations, they have the temptation to charge as many costs as possible to
this provision. The rationale: Many believe analysts often dismiss these costs as not part of continuing
operations and therefore somewhat irrelevant in assessing the overall performance of the company.
Burying as many costs as possible in a restructuring provision therefore permits companies to provide
a more optimistic presentation of current operating results.
On the other hand, companies are continually in a state of flux, and what constitutes a restructuring is
often difficult to assess. One thing is certain—companies should not be permitted to provide for future
operating losses in the current period when accounting for restructuring costs. Nor should they be
permitted to bury operating costs in the restructuring cost classification. [10]

--- Page 1078 ---
As a consequence, IFRS is very restrictive regarding when a restructuring provision can be recorded
and what types of costs may be included in a restructuring provision. Restructurings are defined as a
“program that is planned and controlled by management and materially changes either (1) the scope of
a business undertaken by the company; or (2) the manner in which that business is conducted.”
Examples of restructurings are the sale of a line of business, changes in management structures such
as eliminating a layer of management, or closure of operations in a country.
For a company to record restructuring costs and a related liability, it must meet the general
requirements for recording provisions discussed earlier. In addition, to assure that the restructuring is
valid, companies are required to have a detailed formal plan for the restructuring and to have raised a
valid expectation to those affected by implementation or announcement of the plan.
The case presented in Illustration 13.13 provides an example of a restructuring.
Closure of Division
Facts: On December 12, 2022, Rodea Group decided to close down a division making solar panels. On
December 20, 2022, a detailed plan for closing down the division was finalized; letters were sent to
customers warning them to seek an alternative source of supply and termination notices were sent to
the staff of the division. Rodea estimates that it is probable that it will have €500,000 in restructuring
costs.
Question: Should Rodea report a restructuring liability if it has costs related to the
restructuring?
Solution: (1) The past obligating event for Rodea is the communication of the decision to the
customers and employees, which gives rise to a constructive obligation on December 31, 2022,
because it creates a valid expectation that the division will be closed. (2) An outflow of resources in
settlement is probable and reliably estimated. A provision is recognized at December 31, 2022, for
the best estimate of closing the division, in this case, €500,000.
ILLUSTRATION 13.13 Accounting for Restructuring
Only direct incremental costs associated with the restructuring may be included in the restructuring
provision. At the same time, IFRS provides specific guidance related to certain costs and losses that
should be excluded from the restructuring provision. Illustration 13.14 provides a summary of costs
that may and may not be included in a restructuring provision.
Costs Included (direct, incremental)
Costs Excluded
Employee termination costs
related directly to the
restructuring.
Contract termination costs, such as
lease termination penalties.
Onerous contract provisions.
Investment in new systems.
Lower utilization of facilities.
Costs of training or relocating staff.
Costs of moving assets or operations.
Administration or marketing costs.
Allocations of company overhead.
Expected future operating costs or expected operating
losses unless they relate to an onerous contract.
ILLUSTRATION 13.14 Costs Included/Excluded from Restructuring Provision

--- Page 1079 ---
In general, the costs-excluded list is comprised of expenditures that relate to the future operations of
the business and are not liabilities associated with the restructuring as of the end of the reporting
period. Therefore, such expenditures are recognized on the same basis as if they arose independently of
a restructuring. [11]
Self-Insurance
As discussed earlier, liabilities are not recorded for general risks (e.g., losses that might arise due to
poor expected economic conditions). Similarly, companies do not record liabilities for more specific
future risks such as allowances for repairs. These items do not meet the definition of a liability because
they do not arise from a past transaction but instead relate to future events.
Some companies take out insurance policies against the potential losses from fire, flood, storm, and
accident. Other companies do not. The reasons: Some risks are not insurable, the insurance rates are
prohibitive (e.g., earthquakes and riots), or the companies make a business decision to self-insure.
Self-insurance is another item that is not recognized as a provision.
Despite its name, self-insurance is not insurance but risk assumption. Any company that
assumes its own risks puts itself in the position of incurring expenses or losses as they occur. There is
little theoretical justification for the establishment of a liability based on a hypothetical charge to
insurance expense (see Underlying Concepts). This is “as if” accounting. The conditions for accrual
stated in IFRS are not satisfied prior to the occurrence of the event. Until that time, there is no
diminution in the value of the property. And unlike an insurance company, which has contractual
obligations to reimburse policyholders for losses, a company can have no such obligation to itself and,
hence, no liability either before or after the occurrence of damage.10
Underlying Concepts
Even if companies can estimate the amount of losses with a high degree of certainty, the losses
are not liabilities because they result from a future event and not from a past event.
Exposure to risks of loss resulting from uninsured past injury to others, however, is an
existing condition involving uncertainty about the amount and timing of losses that may develop. A
company with a fleet of vehicles for example, would have to accrue uninsured losses resulting from
injury to others or damage to the property of others that took place prior to the date of the financial
statements (if the experience of the company or other information enables it to make a reasonable
estimate of the liability).11 However, it should not establish a liability for expected future injury to
others or damage to the property of others, even if it can reasonably estimate the amount of losses.
Disclosures Related to Provisions
The disclosures related to provisions are extensive. A company must provide a reconciliation of its
beginning to ending balance for each major class of provisions, identifying what caused the change
during the period. In addition, the provision must be described and the expected timing of any outflows
disclosed. Also, disclosure about uncertainties related to expected outflows as well as expected
reimbursements should be provided. [12] Illustration 13.15 provides an example, based on the
provisions note in Nokia’s (FIN) annual report.

--- Page 1080 ---
Nokia
Notes to the Financial Statements (partial)
29. Provisions
(€ in millions)
Restructuring Warranty Litigation Environmental
Project
losses
Divestment-
related
Mat
liab
At January 1,
2018
722
210
130
107
76
76
Translation
differences
2
0
(11)
4
1
(5)
Reclassification
(18)
0
9
(1)
0
0
Charged to
income
statement:
Additional
provisions
289
171
32
11
0
0
Changes in
estimates
(51)
(75)
(9)
(3)
(10)
(5)
Total after
changes to
income:
944
306
151
118
67
66
Utilized during
the year
(451)
(111)
(42)
(10)
(12)
0
At December
31, 2018
493
195
109
108
55
66
As of December 31, 2018, the restructuring provision amounted to EUR 493 million including personnel
restructuring related costs, such as real estate exit costs. The provision consists of EUR 427 million glob
to the announcement on April 6, 2016 and EUR 66 million relating to the restructuring provisions recog
previously announced restructuring programs. The majority of the restructuring-related cash outflows is
over the next two years.
The warranty provision relates to sold products. Cash outflows related to the warranty provision are gen
occur within the next 18 months.
The litigation provision includes estimated potential future settlements for litigation. Cash outflows rela
provision are inherently uncertain and generally occur over several periods.
The environmental provision includes estimated costs to sufficiently clean and refurbish contaminated s
necessary, and where necessary, continuing surveillance at sites where the environmental remediation e
significant. Cash outflows related to the environmental liability are inherently uncertain and generally o
periods.
The project loss provision relates to onerous customer contracts. Cash outflows related to the project los
generally expected to occur over the next 12 months.

--- Page 1081 ---
The divestment-related provision relates to the sale of businesses, and includes certain liabilities where 
required to indemnify the buyer. Cash outflows related to the divestment-related provision are inherentl
The material liability provision relates to non-cancelable purchase commitments with suppliers, in exces
requirements as of each reporting date. Cash outflows related to the material liability provision are expe
the next 12 months.
Other provisions include provisions for various contractual obligations, other obligations and uncertain 
outflows related to other provisions are generally expected to occur over the next two years.
ILLUSTRATION 13.15 Provisions Disclosure
Contingencies
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting for loss and gain contingencies.
In a general sense, all provisions are contingent because they are uncertain in timing or amount.
However, IFRS uses the term “contingent” for liabilities and assets that are not recognized in the
financial statements. [13]
Contingent Liabilities
Contingent liabilities are not recognized in the financial statements because they are (1) a possible
obligation (not yet confirmed as a present obligation), (2) a present obligation for which it is not
probable that payment will be made, or (3) a present obligation for which a reliable estimate of the
obligation cannot be made. Examples of contingent liabilities are:
A lawsuit in which it is only possible that the company might lose.
A guarantee related to collectibility of a receivable.
Illustration 13.16 presents the general guidelines for the accounting and reporting of contingent
liabilities.
Outcome
Probability*
Accounting Treatment
Virtually certain
At least 90%
Report as liability (provision).
Probable (more likely than
not)
51–89% probable
Report as liability (provision).
Possible but not probable
5–50%
Disclosure required.
Remote
Less than 5%
No disclosure required.
*In practice, the percentages for virtually certain and remote may deviate from those presented
here.
ILLUSTRATION 13.16 Contingent Liability Guidelines
Unless the possibility of any outflow in settlement is remote, companies should disclose the contingent
liability at the end of the reporting period, providing a brief description of the nature of the contingent
liability and, where practicable:
1. An estimate of its financial effect;
2. An indication of the uncertainties relating to the amount or timing of any outflow; and
3. The possibility of any reimbursement.

--- Page 1082 ---
Illustration 13.17 provides a disclosure by Barloworld Limited (ZAF) related to its contingent
liabilities.
Barloworld Limited
(R in millions)
2018 2017
Contingent liabilities (in part)
Performance guarantees given to customers, other guarantees and claims
872
785
Buy-back and repurchase commitments not reflected on the statement of financial
position
94
126
During 2018 the Barloworld Equipment division has entered into a 25% risk share agreement with
Caterpillar Financial in South Africa and Portugal. The risk share agreement only relates to certain
agreed upon customer risk profiles and relates to exposure at default less any recoveries. As of 30
September 2018 the maximum exposure of this guarantee was estimated to be R278 million.
In October 2017, the Barloworld Equipment South Africa (BWE SA) business received notification
from the Competition Commission that it is investigating a complaint against the Contractors Plant
Hire Association of which Barloworld Equipment was a member. The matter is ongoing but no action
has been taken by the Competition Authorities.
The company and its subsidiaries are continuously subject to various tax and customs audits in the
territories in which it operates. While in most cases the companies are able to successfully defend the
tax positions taken, the outcomes of some of the audits are being disputed. Where, based on our own
judgement and the advice of external legal counsel, we believe there is a probable likelihood of the
group being found liable, adequate provisions have been recognised in the financial statements.
ILLUSTRATION 13.17 Contingent Liability Disclosure
Contingent Assets
A contingent asset is a possible asset that arises from past events and whose existence will be
confirmed by the occurrence or non-occurrence of uncertain future events not wholly within the
control of the company. [14] Typical contingent assets are:
1. Possible receipts of monies from gifts, donations, and bonuses.
2. Possible refunds from the government in tax disputes.
3. Pending court cases with a probable favorable outcome.
Contingent assets are not recognized on the statement of financial position. If realization of the
contingent asset is virtually certain, it is no longer considered a contingent asset and is recognized as
an asset. Virtually certain is generally interpreted to be at least a probability of 90 percent or more.
The general rules related to contingent assets are presented in Illustration 13.18.

--- Page 1083 ---
Outcome
Probability*
Accounting Treatment
Virtually certain
At least 90% probable
Report as asset (no longer contingent).
Probable (more likely than
not)
51–90% probable
Disclose.
Possible but not probable
5–50%
No disclosure required.
Remote
Less than 5%
No disclosure required.
*In practice, the percentages for virtually certain and remote may deviate from those presented
here.
ILLUSTRATION 13.18 Contingent Asset Guidelines
Contingent assets are disclosed when an inflow of economic benefits is considered more likely than not
to occur (greater than 50 percent). However, it is important that disclosures for contingent assets avoid
giving misleading indications of the likelihood of income arising. As a result, it is not surprising that
the thresholds for allowing recognition of contingent assets are more stringent than those for
liabilities.
What might be an example of a contingent asset that becomes an asset to be recorded? To illustrate,
assume that Marcus Realty leases a property to Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR). The contract
is non-cancelable for five years. On December 1, 2022, before the end of the contract, M&S withdraws
from the contract and is required to pay £245,000 as a penalty. At the time M&S cancels the contract, a
receivable and related income should be reported by Marcus. The disclosure includes the nature and,
where practicable, the estimated financial effects of the asset.
Presentation and Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Indicate how to present and analyze liability-related information.
Presentation of Current Liabilities
In practice, current liabilities are usually recorded and reported in financial statements at
their full maturity value. Because of the short time periods involved, frequently less than one year,
the difference between the present value of a current liability and the maturity value is usually not
large. The profession accepts as immaterial any slight overstatement of liabilities that results from
carrying current liabilities at maturity value.
The current liabilities accounts are commonly presented after non-current liabilities in the statement
of financial position. Within the current liabilities section, companies may list the accounts in order of
maturity, in descending order of amount, or in order of liquidation preference. Illustration 13.19
presents an adapted excerpt of Wilmar International Limited’s (SGP) financial statements that is
representative of the reports of large companies.

--- Page 1084 ---
Wilmar International Limited
December 31
(in thousands)
Current assets
2018
2017
Inventories
$ 7,911,302 $ 8,223,606
Trade receivables
4,349,147
4,101,058
Other financial receivables
7,517,691
5,354,750
Other non-financial assets
1,467,301
1,153,055
Derivative financial instruments
524,989
368,166
Investment securities
326,164
421,328
Other bank deposits
1,719,077
1,502,726
Cash and bank balances
1,650,478
1,454,708
$25,466,149 $22,579,397
Current liabilities
Trade payables
$ 1,441,729 $ 1,094,846
Other financial payables
1,492,732
1,397,906
Other non-financial liabilities
411,577
400,616
Derivative financial instruments
321,857
503,797
Loans and borrowings
17,821,225
16,130,316
Tax payables
139,746
159,648
$12,628,866 $19,687,129
ILLUSTRATION 13.19 Current Assets and Current Liabilities
Detail and supplemental information concerning current liabilities should be sufficient to meet the
requirement of full disclosure. Companies should clearly identify secured liabilities, as well as indicate
the related assets pledged as collateral. If the due date of any liability can be extended, a company
should disclose the details. Companies should not offset current liabilities against assets that they will
apply to their liquidation. As discussed earlier, current maturities of long-term debt are classified as
current liabilities.
Analysis of Current Liabilities
The distinction between current and non-current liabilities is important. It provides information about
the liquidity of the company. Liquidity regarding a liability is the expected time to elapse before its
payment. In other words, a liability soon to be paid is a current liability. A liquid company is better able
to withstand a financial downturn. Also, it has a better chance of taking advantage of investment
opportunities that develop.
Analysts use certain basic ratios such as net cash flow provided by operating activities to current
liabilities, and the turnover ratios for receivables and inventory, to assess liquidity. Two other ratios
used to examine liquidity are the current ratio and the acid-test ratio.
Current Ratio

--- Page 1085 ---
The current ratio is the ratio of total current assets to total current liabilities. Illustration 13.20
shows its formula.
Current Ratio =
Current Assets
Current Liabilities
ILLUSTRATION 13.20 Formula for Current Ratio
The ratio is frequently expressed as a coverage of so many times. Sometimes it is called the working
capital ratio because working capital is the excess of current assets over current liabilities.
A satisfactory current ratio does not provide information on the portion of the current assets that may
be tied up in slow-moving inventories. With inventories, especially raw materials and work in process,
there is a question of how long it will take to transform them into the finished product and what
ultimately will be realized in the sale of the merchandise. Eliminating the inventories, along with any
prepaid expenses, from the amount of current assets might provide better information for short-term
creditors. Therefore, some analysts use the acid-test ratio in place of the current ratio.
Acid-Test Ratio
Many analysts favor an acid-test or quick ratio that relates total current liabilities to cash, short-
term investments, and receivables. Illustration 13.21 shows the formula for this ratio. As you can
see, the acid-test ratio does not include inventories and prepaid expenses.
Acid-Test Ratio =
ILLUSTRATION 13.21 Formula for Acid-Test Ratio
To illustrate the computation of these two ratios, we use the information for Wilmar International
Limited (SGP) in Illustration 13.19. Illustration 13.22 shows the computation of the current and
acid-test ratios for Wilmar.
Current Ratio =
=
= 2.02 times
Acid-Test Ratio =
=
= 1.27
ILLUSTRATION 13.22 Computation of Current and Acid-Test Ratios for Wilmar
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accumulated rights
acid-test (quick) ratio
assessments
assurance-type warranty
bonus
cash dividend payable
claims
compensated absences
constructive obligation
Cash + Short-Term Investments + Net Receivables
Current Liabilities
Current Assets
Current Liabilities
$25,466,149
$12,628,866
Cash + Short-Term Investments + Net Receivables
Current Liabilities
$16,087,546
$12,628,866

--- Page 1086 ---
contingent assets
contingent liabilities
current liability
current maturity of long-term debt
current ratio
environmental liabilities
liability
litigation
non-accumulating rights
notes payable (trade notes payable)
onerous contracts
operating cycle
preference dividends in arrears
premiums
probable
provision
restructuring
returnable cash deposits
self-insurance
service-type warranty
short-term obligations expected to be refinanced
Social Security taxes
trade accounts payable
trade notes payable
unearned revenues
value-added tax
vested rights
virtually certain
warranty
working capital ratio
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the nature, valuation, and reporting of current liabilities.
Current liabilities. A current liability is generally reported if one of two conditions exists: (1) the
liability is expected to be settled within its normal operating cycle, or (2) the liability is expected to be
settled within 12 months after the reporting date. This definition has gained wide acceptance because it
recognizes operating cycles of varying lengths in different industries. Theoretically, liabilities should be
measured by the present value of the future outlay of cash required to liquidate them. In practice,
companies usually record and report current liabilities at their full maturity value.

--- Page 1087 ---
There are several types of current liabilities, such as (1) accounts payable, (2) notes payable, (3) current
maturities of long-term debt, (4) dividends payable, (5) customer advances and deposits, (6) unearned
revenues, (7) taxes payable, and (8) employee-related liabilities.
Short-term debt expected to be refinanced. A short-term obligation is excluded from current
liabilities if, at the reporting date, the company has a right to defer settlement of the liability (e.g., a
refinancing) for at least 12 months after the reporting date.
Employee-related liabilities. The employee-related liabilities are (1) payroll deductions, (2)
compensated absences, and (3) bonus agreements.
2 Explain the accounting for different types of provisions.
A provision is a liability of uncertain timing or amount (sometimes referred to as an estimated
liability). Provisions are very common and may be reported as either current or non-current depending
on the date of expected payment. Common types of provisions are (1) litigation obligations, (2)
warranty obligations, (3) consideration payable, (4) environmental obligations, (5) onerous
obligations, and (6) restructuring obligations. Companies accrue an expense and related liability for a
provision only if the following three conditions are met: (1) a company has a present obligation (legal
or constructive) as a result of a past event, (2) it is probable that an outflow of resources embodying
economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation, and (3) a reliable estimate can be made of
the amount of the obligation. If any of these three conditions is not met, no provision is recognized.
3 Explain the accounting for loss and gain contingencies.
Contingent liabilities are not recognized in the financial statements because they are possible
obligations (not yet confirmed as present obligations) or they are present obligations but it is not
probable that payment will be necessary or a reliable estimate of the obligations cannot be made.
Contingent assets are not recognized on the statement of financial position. If realization of the
contingent asset is virtually certain, it is no longer considered a contingent asset and is recognized as
an asset. Virtually certain is generally interpreted to be at least a probability of 90 percent or more.
4 Indicate how to present and analyze liability-related information.
Current liabilities are usually recorded and reported in financial statements at full maturity value.
Current liabilities are commonly presented after non-current liabilities in the statement of financial
position. Within the current liabilities section, companies may list the accounts in order of maturity, in
descending order of amount, or in order of liquidation preference. Two ratios used to analyze liquidity
are the current and acid-test ratio.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions, and a full
glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Listed below are selected transactions of Baileys’ Department Store for the current year ending
December 31.
1. On December 5, the store received $500 from the Jackson Players as a deposit to be returned
after certain furniture to be used in stage production was returned on January 15.

--- Page 1088 ---
2. During December, cash sales totaled $798,000, which includes the 5% sales tax that must be
remitted to the state by the fifteenth day of the following month.
3. On December 10, the store purchased for cash three delivery trucks for $120,000. The trucks
were purchased in a state that applies a 5% sales tax.
4. Baileys’ determined it will cost $100,000 to restore the area (considered a land improvement)
surrounding one of its parking lots, when the store closes in 2 years. Baileys’ estimates the fair
value of the obligation at December 31 is $84,000.
5. As a result of uninsured accidents during the year, personal injury suits for $350,000 and
$60,000 have been filed against the company. It is the judgment of Baileys’ legal counsel that an
unfavorable outcome is unlikely in the $60,000 case but that an unfavorable verdict
approximating $250,000 (reliably estimated) will probably result in the $350,000 case.
6. Baileys’ Midwest store division, consisting of 12 stores in “Tornado Alley,” is uninsurable
because of the special risk of injury to customers and employees, losses due to severe weather,
and subpar construction standards in older malls. The year 2022 is considered one of the safest
(luckiest) in the division’s history because no loss due to injury or casualty was suffered. Having
suffered an average of three casualties a year in the last decade (ranging from $60,000 to
$700,000), management is certain that next year the company will probably not be so fortunate.
Instructions
a. Prepare all the journal entries necessary to record the transactions noted above as they occurred
and any adjusting journal entries relative to the transactions that would be required to present
fair financial statements at December 31. Date each entry. For simplicity, assume that adjusting
entries are recorded only once a year on December 31.
b. For items 5 and 6, indicate what should be reported relative to each situation in the financial
statements and accompanying notes. Explain why.
Solution
a. 
1. Dec. 5
Cash
500
Due to Customer
500
2. Dec. 1–31
Cash
798,000
Sales Revenue ($798,000 ÷ 1.05)
760,000
Sales Taxes Payable ($760,000 × .05)
38,000
3. Dec. 10
Trucks ($120,000 × 1.05)
126,000
Cash
126,000
4. Dec. 31
Land Improvements
84,000
Environmental Liability
84,000
5.
Lawsuit Loss
250,000
Lawsuit Liability
250,000
6. No entry required.  
 
 
b. 
5. A loss and a liability have been recorded in the first case assuming (i) information is available
that indicates it is probable that a liability had been incurred at the date of the financial
statements and (ii) the amount is reasonably estimable. That is, the occurrence of the

--- Page 1089 ---
uninsured accidents during the year plus the outstanding injury suits and the attorney’s
estimate of probable loss requires recognition of a loss contingency.
6. Even though Baileys’ Midwest store division is uninsurable due to high risk and has sustained
repeated losses in the past, as of the statement of financial position date no assets have been
impaired or liabilities incurred, nor is an amount reasonably estimable. Therefore, this
situation does not satisfy the criteria for recognition of a loss contingency. Also, unless a
casualty has occurred or there is some other evidence to indicate impairment of an asset prior
to the issuance of the financial statements, there is no disclosure required relative to a loss
contingency. Disclosure is required when one or more of the criteria for a loss contingency are
not satisfied, and there is a reasonable possibility that a liability may have been incurred or an
asset impaired, or it is probable that a claim will be asserted and there is a reasonable
possibility of an unfavorable outcome.
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities, and many
more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. Distinguish between a current liability and a non-current liability.
2. Assume that your friend Hans Jensen, who is a music major, asks you to define and discuss the
nature of a liability. Assist him by preparing a definition of a liability and by explaining to him what
you believe are the elements or factors inherent in the concept of a liability.
3. Why is the liabilities section of the statement of financial position of primary significance to
bankers?
4. How are current liabilities related to a company’s operating cycle?
5. Leong Hock, a newly hired loan analyst, is examining the current liabilities of a company loan
applicant. He observes that unearned revenues have declined in the current year compared to the prior
year. Is this a positive indicator about the client’s liquidity? Explain.
6. How is present value related to the concept of a liability?
7. Explain how to account for a zero-interest-bearing note payable.
8. How should a debt callable by the creditor be reported in the debtor’s financial statements?
9. Under what conditions should a short-term obligation be excluded from current liabilities?
10. What evidence is necessary to demonstrate the ability to defer settlement of short-term debt?
11. Discuss the accounting treatment or disclosure that should be accorded a declared but unpaid cash
dividend; an accumulated but undeclared dividend on cumulative preference shares; and a share
dividend distributable.
12. How does unearned revenue arise? Why can it be classified properly as a current liability? Give
several examples of business activities that result in unearned revenues.
13. What are compensated absences?
14. Under what conditions must an employer accrue a liability for the cost of compensated absences?
15. What do the terms vested rights, accumulated rights, and non-accumulated rights mean in relation
to compensated absences? Explain their accounting significance.
16. Faith Battle operates a health-food store, and she has been the only employee. Her business is
growing, and she is considering hiring some additional staff to help her in the store. Explain to her the
various payroll deductions that she will have to account for, including their potential impact on her
financial statements, if she hires additional staff.

--- Page 1090 ---
17. Explain the difference between a value-added tax and a sales tax.
18. Define a provision, and give three examples of a provision.
19. Under what conditions should a provision be recorded?
20. Distinguish between a current liability, such as accounts payable, and a provision.
21. How are the terms “probable” and “virtually certain” related to provisions and contingencies?
22. Explain the difference between a legal obligation and a constructive obligation.
23. Explain the accounting for an assurance-type warranty.
24. Grant plc has had a record-breaking year in terms of growth in sales and profitability. However,
market research indicates that it will experience operating losses in two of its major businesses next
year. The controller has proposed that the company record a provision for these future losses this year
since it can afford to take the charge and still show good results. Advise the controller on the
appropriateness of this charge.
25. How does an assurance-type warranty differ from a service-type warranty?
26. What is an onerous contract? Give two examples of an onerous contract.
27. Define a restructuring. What costs should not be accrued in a restructuring?
28. When must a company recognize an environmental provision?
29. Should a liability be recorded for risk of loss due to lack of insurance coverage? Discuss.
30. What factors must be considered in determining whether to record a liability for pending
litigation? For threatened litigation?
31. Within the current liabilities section, how do you believe the accounts should be listed? Defend
your position.
32. How does the acid-test ratio differ from the current ratio? How are they similar?
33. When should liabilities for each of the following items be recorded on the books of an ordinary
business?
a. Acquisition of goods by purchase on credit.
b. Onerous contract.
c. Special bonus to employees.
d. Warranty.
e. Profit-sharing payment.
Brief Exercises
BE13.1 (LO 1) Roley SA uses a periodic inventory system and the gross method of accounting for
purchase discounts. On July 1, Roley purchased €60,000 of inventory, terms 2/10, n/30, FOB shipping
point. Roley paid freight costs of €1,200. On July 3, Roley returned damaged goods and received credit
of €6,000. On July 10, Roley paid for the goods. Prepare all necessary journal entries for Roley.
BE13.2 (LO 1) Upland Company borrowed $40,000 on November 1, 2021, by signing a $40,000, 9%,
3-month note. Prepare Upland’s November 1, 2021, entry; the December 31, 2021, annual adjusting
entry; and the February 1, 2022, entry.
BE13.3 (LO 1) Takemoto Ltd. borrowed ¥60,000,000 on November 1, 2021, by signing a ¥61,350,000
3-month, zero-interest-bearing note. Prepare Takemoto’s November 1, 2021, entry; the December 31,
2021, annual adjusting entry; and the February 1, 2022, entry.
BE13.4 (LO 1) At December 31, 2021, Burr AG owes €500,000 on a note payable due February 15,
2022. (a) If Burr expects to refinance the obligation by issuing a long-term note on February 14 and

--- Page 1091 ---
using the proceeds to pay off the note due February 15, how much (if any) of the €500,000 should be
reported as a current liability at December 31, 2021? (b) If Burr pays off the note on February 15, 2022,
and then borrows €1,000,000 on a long-term basis on March 1, how much (if any) of the €500,000
should be reported as a current liability at December 31, 2021, the end of the fiscal year?
BE13.5 (LO 1) Herzog SE has a long-term debt with a maturity date of November 2, 2023. On October
10, 2021, it breaches a covenant related to this debt and the loan becomes due on demand. Herzog
reaches an agreement with the lender on January 5, 2022, to provide a waiver of the breach. The
financial statement reporting date is December 31, 2021, and the financial statements are authorized
for issue on March 16, 2022. Explain whether the debt obligation should be classified as current or
non-current.
BE13.6 (LO 1) Sport Pro Magazine sold 12,000 annual subscriptions on August 1, 2022, for €18 each.
Prepare Sport Pro’s August 1, 2022, journal entry and the December 31, 2022, annual adjusting entry.
BE13.7 (LO 1) Dillons AS made credit sales of €30,000 which are subject to 6% VAT. The company
also made cash sales which totaled €20,670 including the 6% VAT. (a) Prepare the entry to record
Dillons’ credit sales. (b) Prepare the entry to record Dillons’ cash sales.
BE13.8 (LO 1) Henning plc sells its products to Len Taylor, a private individual, for €5,000. The sale
is subject to a VAT of 15%. Prepare the journal entry to record the sale by Henning.
BE13.9 (LO 1) Lexington AG’s weekly payroll of €24,000 included Social Security taxes withheld of
€1,920, income taxes withheld of €2,990, and insurance premiums withheld of €250. Prepare the
journal entry to record Lexington’s payroll.
BE13.10 (LO 1) Kasten SA provides paid vacations to its employees. At December 31, 2022, 30
employees have each earned 2 weeks of vacation time. The employees’ average salary is €700 per week.
Prepare Kasten’s December 31, 2022, adjusting entry.
BE13.11 (LO 1) Mayaguez Ltd. provides its officers with bonuses based on net income. For 2021, the
bonuses total £350,000 and are paid on February 15, 2022. Prepare Mayaguez’s December 31, 2021,
adjusting entry and the February 15, 2022, entry.
BE13.12 (LO 2, 3) Scorcese A.Ş. is involved in a lawsuit at December 31, 2022. (a) Prepare the
December 31 entry assuming it is probable that Scorcese will be liable for 900,000 as a result of this
suit. (b) Prepare the December 31 entry, if any, assuming it is not probable that Scorcese will be liable
for any payment as a result of this suit.
BE13.13 (LO 2, 3) Buchanan Company recently was sued by a competitor for patent infringement.
Attorneys have determined that it is probable that Buchanan will lose the case and that a reasonable
estimate of damages to be paid by Buchanan is $300,000. In light of this case, Buchanan is considering
establishing a $100,000 self-insurance allowance. What entry or entries, if any, should Buchanan
record to recognize this provision?
BE13.14 (LO 2) Calaf’s Drillers erects and places into service an off-shore oil platform on January 1,
2022, at a cost of £10,000,000. Calaf estimates it will cost £1,000,000 to dismantle and remove the
platform at the end of its useful life in 10 years, which it is legally obligated to do. (The fair value at
January 1, 2022, of the dismantle and removal costs is £450,000.) Prepare the entry to record the
environmental liability.
BE13.15 (LO 2) Streep Factory provides a 2-year warranty with one of its products which was first
sold in 2022. Streep sold $1,000,000 of products subject to the warranty. Streep expects $125,000 of
warranty costs over the next 2 years. In that year, Streep spent $70,000 servicing warranty claims.
Prepare Streep’s journal entry to record the sales (ignore cost of goods sold) and the December 31
adjusting entry, assuming the expenditures are inventory costs.
BE13.16 (LO 2) Leppard AG sells DVD players. The company also offers its customers a 4-year
warranty contract. Early in 2022, Leppard sold 20,000 warranty contracts at €99 each. The company
spent €180,000 servicing warranties during 2022. Prepare Leppard’s journal entries for (a) the sale of

--- Page 1092 ---
contracts, (b) the cost of servicing the warranties, and (c) the recognition of warranty revenue. Assume
the service costs are inventory costs.
BE13.17 (LO 2) Wynn Company offers a set of building blocks to customers who send in 3 box tops
from Wynn cereal, along with 50¢. The block sets cost Wynn $1.10 each to purchase and 60¢ each to
mail to customers. During 2022, Wynn sold 1,200,000 boxes of cereal. The company expects 30% of
the box tops to be sent in. During 2022, 120,000 box tops were redeemed. Prepare Wynn’s December
31, 2022, adjusting entry.
BE13.18 (LO 2, 3) Cargo Company purchased land from Hazard Company for €20,000,000 on
September 13, 2022. On October 31, 2022, it learned that the site was contaminated. As a result, Cargo
sued Hazard for €4,000,000. Cargo’s attorneys believe that their odds of winning the case are 75%.
Indicate how Cargo should account for this lawsuit at December 31, 2022.
BE13.19 (LO 2) Management at Eli plc has decided to close one of its plants. It will continue to
operate the plant for approximately one year. It anticipates the following costs will be incurred as a
result of this closing: (1) termination compensation costs, (2) marketing costs to rebrand the company
image, (3) future losses for keeping the plant open for another year, and (4) lease termination costs
related to the closing. Indicate which, if any, of these costs should not be considered restructuring costs
for purposes of establishing a provision.
BE13.20 (LO 2) Luckert NV decided to cancel an existing property lease in one of its divisions, as its
operations in this area were no longer profitable. Unfortunately, Luckert has a non-cancelable lease
and cannot sublease the property. The present value of future lease payments under the lease is
€2,000,000. The penalty to break the lease is €1,450,000. Prepare the journal entry to record this
cancelation.
Exercises
E13.1 (LO 1) (Statement of Financial Position Classification) Consider the following items.
a. Accrued vacation pay.
b. Income taxes payable.
c. Service-type warranties on appliance sales.
d. Social Security taxes payable.
e. Personal injury claim pending.
f. Unpaid bonus to officers.
g. Deposit received from customer to guarantee performance of a contract.
h. Value-added tax payable.
i. Gift certificates sold to customers but not yet redeemed.
j. Premium offers outstanding.
k. Accounts payable.
l. Employee payroll deductions unremitted.
m. Current maturities of long-term debts to be paid from current assets.
n. Cash dividends declared but unpaid.
o. Dividends in arrears on preference shares.
p. Loans to officers.
Instructions
How would each of the preceding items be reported on the statement of financial position?

--- Page 1093 ---
E13.2 (LO 1) (Accounts and Notes Payable) The following are selected 2022 transactions of Darby
Corporation.
Sept. 1 Purchased inventory from Orion Company on account for $50,000. Darby records purchases
gross and uses a periodic inventory system.
Oct. 1 Issued a $50,000, 12-month, 8% note to Orion in payment of account.
Oct. 1 Borrowed $75,000 from the Shore Bank by signing a 12-month, zero-interest-bearing $81,000
note.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries for the selected transactions above.
b. Prepare adjusting entries at December 31.
c. Compute the total net liability to be reported on the December 31 statement of financial position
for:
1. The interest-bearing note.
2. The zero-interest-bearing note.
E13.3 (LO 1) (Refinancing of Short-Term Debt) On December 31, 2021, Alexander AG had
€1,200,000 of short-term debt in the form of notes payable due February 2, 2022. On January 21, 2022,
the company issued 25,000 ordinary shares for €36 per share, receiving €900,000 proceeds after
brokerage fees and other costs of issuance. On February 2, 2022, the proceeds from the share sale,
supplemented by an additional €300,000 cash, are used to liquidate the €1,200,000 debt. The
December 31, 2021, statement of financial position is authorized for issue on February 23, 2022.
Instructions
Show how the €1,200,000 of short-term debt should be presented on the December 31, 2021,
statement of financial position.
E13.4 (LO 1) (Refinancing of Short-Term Debt) The CFO for Yong Corporation is discussing with
the company’s CEO issues related to the company’s short-term obligations. Presently, both the current
ratio and the acid-test ratio for the company are quite low, and the CEO is wondering if any of these
short-term obligations could be reclassified as long-term. The financial reporting date is December 31,
2021. Two short-term obligations were discussed, and the following action was taken by the CFO.
Short-Term Obligation A: Yong has a $50,000 short-term obligation due on March 1, 2022. The
CFO discussed with its lender whether the payment could be extended to March 1, 2024, provided Yong
agrees to provide additional collateral. An agreement is reached on February 1, 2022, to change the loan
terms to extend the obligation’s maturity to March 1, 2024. The financial statements are authorized for
issuance on April 1, 2022.
Short-Term Obligation B: Yong also has another short-term obligation of $120,000 due on
February 15, 2022. In its discussion with the lender, the lender agrees to extend the maturity date to
February 1, 2023. The agreement is signed on December 18, 2021. The financial statements are
authorized for issuance on March 31, 2022.
Instructions
Indicate how these transactions should be reported at December 31, 2021, on Yong’s statement of
financial position.
E13.5 (LO 1) (Debt Classifications) Presented below are four different situations related to Mckee
plc debt obligations. Mckee’s next financial reporting date is December 31, 2021. The financial
statements are authorized for issuance on March 1, 2022.

--- Page 1094 ---
1. Mckee has a debt obligation maturing on December 31, 2024. The debt is callable on demand by
the lender at any time.
2. Mckee also has a long-term obligation due on December 1, 2023. On November 10, 2021, it
breaches a covenant on its debt obligation and the loan becomes due on demand. An agreement is
reached to provide a waiver of the breach on December 8, 2021.
3. Mckee has a long-term obligation of £400,000, which is maturing over 4 years in the amount of
£100,000 per year. The obligation is dated November 1, 2021, and the first maturity date is
November 1, 2022.
4. Mckee has a short-term obligation due February 15, 2022. Its lender agrees to extend the maturity
date of this loan to February 15, 2024. The agreement for extension is signed on January 15, 2022.
Instructions
Indicate how each of these debt obligations is reported on Mckee’s statement of financial position on
December 31, 2021.
E13.6 (LO 1) (Compensated Absences) Matthewson SA began operations on January 2, 2021. It
employs 9 individuals who work 8-hour days and are paid hourly. Each employee earns 10 paid
vacation days and 6 paid sick days annually. Vacation days may be taken after January 15 of the year
following the year in which they are earned. Sick days may be taken as soon as they are earned; unused
sick days accumulate. Additional information is as follows.
Actual Hourly 
Wage Rate
Vacation Days Used 
by Each Employee
Sick Days Used 
by Each Employee
2021
2022
2021
2022
2021
2022
€12
€13
0
9
4
5
Matthewson has chosen to accrue the cost of compensated absences at rates of pay in effect during the
period when earned and to accrue sick pay when earned.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries to record transactions related to compensated absences during 2021 and
2022.
b. Compute the amounts of any liability for compensated absences that should be reported on the
statement of financial position at December 31, 2021 and 2022.
E13.7 (LO 1) (Compensated Absences) Use the same information as in E13.6, except that
Matthewson SA has chosen (1) not to accrue paid sick leave until used and (2) to accrue vacation time
at expected future rates of pay without discounting. The company used the following projected rates to
accrue vacation time.
Year in Which Vacation 
Time Was Earned
Projected Future Pay Rates 
Used to Accrue Vacation Pay
2021
€12.90
2022
13.70
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries to record transactions related to compensated absences during 2021 and
2022.
b. Compute the amounts of any liability for compensated absences that should be reported on the
statement of financial position at December 31, 2021, and 2022.

--- Page 1095 ---
E13.8 (LO 1) (Adjusting Entry for Sales Tax and VAT) During the month of June, Danielle’s
Boutique had cash sales of R$265,000 and credit sales of R$153,700, both of which include the 6%
sales tax that must be remitted to the government by July 15.
Instructions
a. Prepare the adjusting entry that should be recorded to fairly present the June 30 financial
statements.
b. How would the adjusting entry change if the 6% tax was a VAT rather than a sales tax?
E13.9 (LO 1) (Adjusting Entry for Sales Tax and VAT) Eastwood Ranchers sells a herd of cattle
to Rozo Meat Packers for €30,000 and the related VAT. Rozo Meat Packers sells the beef to Wrangler
Supermarkets for €40,000 and the related VAT. Wrangler Supermarkets sells this beef to customers
for €50,000 plus the related VAT.
Instructions
a. Assuming the VAT is 15% on all sales, prepare the journal entry to record the sale by Rozo Meat
Packers to Wrangler Supermarkets.
b. What is the net cash outlay that Eastwood Ranchers incurs related to the VAT?
E13.10 (LO 1) (Payroll Tax Entries) The payroll of Kee Ltd. for September 2022 is as follows
(amounts in thousands): total payroll was ¥340,000; income taxes in the amount of ¥80,000 were
withheld, as was ¥9,000 in union dues; and the current Social Security tax is 8% of an employee’s
wages. The employer must also remit 8% for employees’ wages.
Instructions
Prepare the necessary journal entries if the salaries and wages paid and the employer payroll taxes are
recorded separately.
E13.11 (LO 1) (Payroll Tax Entries) Allison Hardware Company’s payroll for November 2022 is as
follows: factory, €140,000; sales, €32,000; and administrative, €36,000. The Social Security rate is 8%
on an employee’s wages. Income tax withheld amounts to €16,000 for factory, €7,000 for sales, and
€6,000 for administrative.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule showing the employer’s total cost of salaries and wages for November by
function.
b. Prepare the journal entries to record the factory, sales, and administrative payrolls including the
employer’s payroll taxes.
E13.12 (LO 2) (Warranties) Soundgarden Ltd. sold 200 color laser copiers on July 10, 2022, for
£4,000 apiece, together with a 1-year warranty. Maintenance on each copier during the warranty period
is estimated to be £330.
Instructions
Prepare entries to record the sale of the copiers, the related warranty costs, and any accrual on
December 31, 2022. Actual warranty expenditures (inventory) in 2022 were £17,000.
E13.13 (LO 2) (Warranties) Early in 2022, Sheryl Crow Equipment sold 500 Rollomatics at €6,000
each. During 2022, Crow spent €20,000 servicing the 2-year assurance warranties that accompany the
Rollomatic. All applicable transactions are on a cash basis.
Instructions

--- Page 1096 ---
a. Prepare 2022 entries for Crow. Assume that Crow estimates the total cost of servicing the
warranties will be €55,000 for 2 years.
b. Prepare 2022 entries for Crow assuming that the warranties are not an integral part of the sale (a
service-type warranty). Assume that of the sales total, €56,000 relates to sales of warranty
contracts. Crow estimates the total cost of servicing the warranties will be €55,000 for 2 years.
Estimate revenues to be recognized on a straight-line basis.
E13.14 (LO 2) (Premium Entries) No Doubt Company includes 1 coupon in each box of soap
powder that it packs, and 10 coupons are redeemable for a premium (a kitchen utensil). In 2022, No
Doubt Company purchased 8,800 premiums at 80 cents each and sold 110,000 boxes of soap powder at
$3.30 per box; 44,000 coupons were presented for redemption in 2022. It is estimated that 60% of the
coupons will eventually be presented for redemption.
Instructions
Prepare all the entries that would be made relative to sales of soap powder and to the premium plan in
2022.
E13.15 (LO 2) (Restructuring Issues) EADS Ltd. is involved in a restructuring related to its energy
division. The company controller and CFO are considering the following costs to accrue as part of the
restructuring. The costs are as follows (amounts in thousands).
1. The company has a long-term lease on one of the facilities related to the division. It is estimated
that it will have to pay a penalty cost of ¥400,000 to break the lease. The company estimates that
the present value related to payments on the lease contract is ¥650,000.
2. The company’s allocation of overhead costs to other divisions will increase by ¥1,500,000 as a
result of restructuring these facilities.
3. Due to the restructuring, some employees will be shifted to some of the other divisions. The cost
of retraining these individuals is estimated to be ¥2,000,000.
4. The company has hired an outplacement firm to help it in dealing with the number of
terminations related to the restructuring. It is estimated the cost for this outplacement firm will be
¥600,000.
5. It is estimated that employee termination costs will be ¥3,000,000.
6. The company believes that it will cost ¥320,000 to move useable assets from the energy division
to other divisions in the company.
Instructions
Indicate whether each of these costs should be included in the restructuring provision in the financial
statements.
E13.16 (LO 2) (Restructuring) On December 31, 2022, the board of Dolman Group decided to close
one of its divisions. The same day a detailed plan for closing the division was agreed to by the board,
and letters were sent to customers and employees affected by this closure.
Instructions
a. What is a restructuring? Provide two examples.
b. To ensure that the restructuring is valid, what two conditions must take place?
c. Possible costs that may be incurred during the restructuring are as follows: (1) investment in new
software as a result of closing the division, (2) cost of moving some assets of the closed division to
other parts of the company, (3) employee termination costs related to closing the division, (4)
expected future operating losses in closing the division, and (5) onerous contract provisions

--- Page 1097 ---
related to the closing. Indicate which (if any) of these costs may be part of a restructuring
provision.
E13.17 (LO 2, 3) (Provisions and Contingencies) Presented below are three independent
situations.
1. During 2022, Maverick ASA became involved in a tax dispute with the government. Maverick’s
attorneys have indicated that they believe it is probable that Maverick will lose this dispute. They
also believe that Maverick will have to pay the government between €800,000 and €1,400,000.
After the 2022 financial statements were issued, the case was settled with the government for
€1,200,000. What amount, if any, should be reported as a liability for this tax dispute as of
December 31, 2022?
2. On October 1, 2022, Holmgren Chemical was identified as a potentially responsible party by its
Environmental Regulatory Agency. Holmgren’s management, along with its counsel, have
concluded that it is probable that Holmgren will be responsible for damages, and a reasonable
estimate of these damages is €6,000,000. Holmgren’s insurance policy of €9,000,000 has a
deductible clause of €500,000. How should Holmgren Chemical report this information in its
financial statements at December 31, 2022?
3. Shinobi Ltd. had a manufacturing plant in Darfur, Sudan, which was destroyed in the civil war. It is
not certain who will compensate Shinobi for this destruction, but Shinobi has been assured by
governmental officials that it will receive a definite amount for this plant. The amount of the
compensation will be less than the fair value of the plant but more than its book value. How
should the compensation be reported in the financial statements of Shinobi?
Instructions
Answer the question at the end of each situation.
E13.18 (LO 2) (Environmental Liability) Bassinger Company purchases an oil tanker depot on
January 1, 2022, at a cost of $600,000. Bassinger expects to operate the depot for 10 years, at which
time it is legally required to dismantle the depot and remove the underground storage tanks. It is
estimated that it will cost $70,000 to dismantle the depot and remove the tanks at the end of the
depot’s useful life.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record the depot and the environmental liability for the depot on
January 1, 2022. Based on an effective-interest rate of 6%, the fair value of the environmental
liability on January 1, 2022, is $39,087.
b. Prepare any journal entries required for the depot and the environmental liability at December 31,
2022. Bassinger uses straight-line depreciation; the estimated residual value for the depot is zero.
c. On December 31, 2031, Bassinger pays a demolition firm to dismantle the depot and remove the
tanks at a price of $80,000. Prepare the journal entry for the settlement of the environmental
liability.
E13.19 (LO 2) 
 (Premiums) The following are three independent situations.
1. Hairston Stamp Company records stamp service revenue and provides for the cost of redemptions
in the year stamps are sold to licensees. Hairston’s past experience indicates that only 80% of the
stamps sold to licensees will be redeemed. Hairston’s liability for stamp redemptions was
$13,000,000 at December 31, 2021. Additional information for 2022 is as follows.
Stamp service revenue from stamps sold to licensees $9,500,000
Cost of redemptions (stamps sold prior to 1/1/22)
6,000,000

--- Page 1098 ---
If all the stamps sold in 2022 were presented for redemption in 2023, the redemption cost would
be $5,200,000. What amount should Hairston report as a liability for stamp redemptions at
December 31, 2022?
2. In packages of its products, Burnitz SA includes coupons that may be presented at retail stores to
obtain discounts on other Burnitz products. Retailers are reimbursed for the face amount of
coupons redeemed plus 10% of that amount for handling costs. Burnitz honors requests for
coupon redemption by retailers up to 3 months after the consumer expiration date. Burnitz
estimates that 60% of all coupons issued will ultimately be redeemed. Information relating to
coupons issued by Burnitz during 2022 is as follows.
Consumer expiration date
12/31/22
Total face amount of coupons issued
€800,000
Total payments to retailers as of 12/31/22
330,000
What amount should Burnitz report as a liability for unredeemed coupons at December 31, 2022?
3. Roland AG sold 700,000 boxes of pie mix under a new sales promotional program. Each box
contains one coupon, which submitted with €4.00, entitles the customer to a baking pan. Roland
pays €6.00 per pan and €0.50 for handling and shipping. Roland estimates that 70% of the
coupons will be redeemed, even though only 250,000 coupons were processed during 2022. What
amount should Roland report as a liability for unredeemed coupons at December 31, 2022?
E13.20 (LO 2) (Provisions) Presented below are three independent situations.
1. Bruegger Transportation purchased a ship on January 1, 2022, for £20,000,000. The useful life of
the ship is 40 years, but it is subject to a government-mandated major overhaul every 4 years with
a total projected cost over the 40 years of £4,000,000. The present value related to these payments
is £3,200,000. Explain how this transaction should be accounted for at January 1, 2022, and at
December 31, 2022. Prepare the journal entries to record all appropriate entries related to the ship
in 2022. Bruegger uses the straight-line method of depreciation and assumes no residual value for
the ship.
2. Marquardt Company signs a 5-year lease related to office space at an annual rental of £30,000. At
the end of the second year, the company decides to close its operation in this part of country. Its
lease is non-cancelable, and the penalty for non-payment is £62,000. The present value of future
payments on the lease is estimated to be £81,000. The company does not believe that it can sublet
these facilities. Explain how this transaction should be accounted for at December 31, 2022.
Prepare the journal entry to record this entry on December 31, 2022.
3. Powersurge Group operates a nuclear power plant. The plant cost £40,000,000 on January 2,
2023. It is estimated that the present value of dismantling the plant and the ensuing clean-up will
be £1,000,000. Explain how this transaction should be accounted for on January 2, 2023. Prepare
the journal entry or entries to record this transaction on January 2, 2023.
Instructions
Prepare the explanation and journal entry required for each situation.
E13.21 (LO 2) (Provisions) The following situations relate to Bolivia Company.
1. Bolivia Company provides a warranty with all products sold. It estimates that it will sell 1,000,000
units of its product for the year ended December 31, 2022, and that its total revenue for the
product will be $100,000,000. It also estimates that 60% of the product will have no defects, 30%
will have major defects, and 10% will have minor defects. The cost of a minor defect is estimated to
be $5 for each product, and the cost for a major defect is $15. The company also estimates that the
minimum amount of warranty expense will be $2,000,000 and the maximum will be $10,000,000.

--- Page 1099 ---
2. Bolivia is involved in a tax dispute with the tax authorities. The most likely outcome of this dispute
is that the company will lose and have to pay $400,000. The minimum it will lose is $20,000 and
the maximum is $2,500,000.
Instructions
Determine the amount to record as provisions, if any, for Bolivia Company at December 31, 2022.
E13.22 (LO 4) (Financial Statement Impact of Liability Transactions) Presented below is a
list of possible transactions.
1. Purchased inventory for €80,000 on account (assume perpetual system is used).
2. Issued an €80,000 note payable in payment on account (see item 1 above).
3. Recorded accrued interest on the note from item 2 above.
4. Borrowed €100,000 from the bank by signing a 6-month, €112,000, zero-interest-bearing note.
5. Recognized 4 months’ interest expense on the note from item 4 above.
6. Recorded cash sales of €75,260, which includes 10% VAT.
7. Recorded wage expense of €35,000. The cash paid was €25,000; the difference was due to various
amounts withheld.
8. Recorded employer’s payroll taxes.
9. Accrued accumulated vacation pay.
10. Recorded an environmental liability and related asset.
11. Recorded bonuses due to employees.
12. Recorded sales of product and related warranties (assume both assurance-type warranty and
service-type warranty).
13. Paid warranty costs that were accrued in item 12 above related to assurance-type warranty.
14. Recorded a liability on a lawsuit that the company will probably lose.
15. Paid service-type warranty costs under contracts from item 12.
16. Recognized warranty revenue (see item 12).
Instructions
Set up a table using the format shown below and analyze the effect of the 16 transactions on the
financial statement categories indicated.
# Assets Liabilities Equity Net Income
1
Use the following code:
I: Increase D: Decrease NE: No net effect
E13.23 LO 4) (Ratio Computations and Discussion) Chen Group has been operating for several
years, and on December 31, 2022, presented the following statement of financial position (amounts in
thousands).
Chen Group
Statement of Financial Position 
December 31, 2022
Plant assets (net) ¥220,000 Share capital—ordinary ¥160,000

--- Page 1100 ---
Chen Group
Statement of Financial Position 
December 31, 2022
Inventory
95,000
Retained earnings
60,000
Receivables
75,000
Mortgage payable
140,000
Cash
40,000
Accounts payable
70,000
¥430,000
¥430,000
The net income for 2022 was ¥25,000. Assume that total assets are the same in 2021 and 2022.
Instructions
Compute each of the following ratios. For each of the four, indicate the manner in which it is computed
and its significance as a tool in the analysis of the financial soundness of the company.
a. Current ratio.
b. Acid-test ratio.
c. Debt to assets.
d. Return on assets.
E13.24 (LO 4) (Ratio Computations and Analysis) EAN Ltd.’s condensed financial statements
provide the following information (amounts in thousands).
EAN Ltd. 
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
December 31, 2021
Property, plant, and equipment
¥ 897,000
¥ 853,000
Current assets
Inventory
¥440,000
¥360,000
Prepaid expenses
3,000
7,000
Accounts receivable
158,000
80,000
Short-term investments
80,000
40,000
Cash
52,000
733,000
60,000
547,000
Total assets
¥1,630,000
¥1,400,000
Equity
¥ 990,000
¥ 840,000
Bonds payable
400,000
400,000
Current liabilities
240,000
160,000
¥1,630,000
¥1,400,000
Income Statement
For the Year Ended 2022
Sales revenue
¥1,640,000
Cost of goods sold
(800,000)
Gross profit
840,000
Selling and administrative expenses
(480,000)
Interest expense
(40,000)
Net income
¥ 320,000

--- Page 1101 ---
Instructions
a. Determine the following for 2022.
1. Current ratio at December 31.
2. Acid-test ratio at December 31.
3. Accounts receivable turnover.
4. Inventory turnover.
5. Return on assets.
6. Profit margin on sales.
b. Prepare a brief evaluation of the financial condition of EAN Ltd. and of the adequacy of its profits.
E13.25 (LO 4) (Ratio Computations and Effect of Transactions) The following information is
related to Leland AG.
Leland AG
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Equipment (net)
€150,000 Share capital—ordinary (par €5) €260,000
Land
20,000
Retained earnings
141,000
Prepaid insurance
8,000
Notes payable (short-term)
50,000
Inventory
170,000
Accounts payable
32,000
Receivables
€110,000
Accrued liabilities
5,000
Less: Allowance
15,000
95,000
€488,000
Cash
45,000
€488,000
Leland AG
Income Statement 
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
€1,400,000
Cost of goods sold
Inventory, Jan. 1, 2022
€200,000
Purchases
790,000
Cost of goods available for sale
990,000
Inventory, Dec. 31, 2022
(170,000)
Cost of goods sold
820,000
Gross profit on sales
580,000
Operating expenses
370,000
Net income
€ 210,000
Instructions
a. Compute the following ratios or relationships of Leland. Assume that the ending account balances
are representative of the entire year unless the information provided indicates differently.
1. Current ratio.
2. Inventory turnover.

--- Page 1102 ---
3. Accounts receivable turnover.
4. Earnings per share.
5. Profit margin on sales.
6. Return on assets for 2022.
b. Indicate for each of the following transactions whether the transaction would improve, weaken, or
have no effect on the current ratio of Leland at December 31, 2022.
1. Write off an uncollectible account receivable, €2,200.
2. Repurchase ordinary shares for cash.
3. Pay €40,000 on notes payable (short-term).
4. Collect €23,000 on accounts receivable.
5. Buy equipment on account.
6. Give an existing creditor a short-term note in settlement of account.
Problems
P13.1 (LO 1) 
 (Current Liability Entries and Adjustments) Described below are
certain transactions of Edwardson AG. The company uses the periodic inventory system.
1. On February 2, the company purchased goods from Martin Company for €70,000 subject to cash
discount terms of 2/10, n/30. Purchases and accounts payable are recorded by Edwardson at net
amounts after cash discounts. The invoice was paid on February 26.
2. On April 1, the company bought a truck for €50,000, paying €4,000 in cash and signing a 1-year,
12% note for the balance of the purchase price.
3. On August 1, the board of directors declared a €300,000 cash dividend that was payable on
September 10 to shareholders of record on August 31.
Instructions
a. Make all the journal entries necessary to record the transactions above using appropriate dates.
b. Edwardson’s year-end is December 31. Assuming that no adjusting entries relative to the
transactions above have been recorded, prepare any adjusting journal entries concerning interest
that are necessary to present fair financial statements at December 31.
P13.2 (LO 1, 2) (Liability Entries) Listed below are selected transactions of Schultz Department
Store for the current year ending December 31.
1. On December 5, the store received €500 from the Jackson Players as a deposit to be returned after
certain furniture to be used in stage production is returned on January 15.
2. During December, cash sales totaled €798,000, which includes the 5% VAT that must be remitted
to the tax authority by the fifteenth day of the following month.
3. On December 10, the store purchased for cash three delivery trucks for €120,000. The trucks were
purchased in a jurisdiction that applies a 5% VAT.
4. The store determined it will cost €100,000 to restore the area surrounding one of its store parking
lots, when the store is closed in 2 years. Schultz estimates the fair value of the obligation at
December 31 is €84,000.
Instructions

--- Page 1103 ---
Prepare all the journal entries necessary to record the transactions noted above as they occurred and
any adjusting journal entries relative to the transactions that would be required to present fair
financial statements at December 31. Date each entry. For simplicity, assume that adjusting entries are
recorded only once a year on December 31.
P13.3 (LO 1) (Payroll Tax Entries) Cedarville Company pays its office employee payroll weekly.
Below is a partial list of employees and their payroll data for August. Because August is their vacation
period, vacation pay is also listed.
Employee
Earnings to 
July 31
Weekly
Pay
Vacation Pay to Be 
Received in August
Mark Hamill
$4,200
$200
–
Karen Robbins
3,500
150
$300
Brent Kirk
2,700
110
220
Alec Guinness
7,400
250
–
Ken Sprouse
8,000
330
660
Assume that the income tax withheld is 10% of wages. Union dues withheld are 2% of wages. Vacations
are taken the second and third weeks of August by Robbins, Kirk, and Sprouse. The Social Security rate
is 8% on employee and employer.
Instructions
Make the journal entries necessary for each of the four August payrolls. The entries for the payroll and
for the company’s liability are made separately. Also make the entry to record the monthly payment of
payroll liabilities.
P13.4 (LO 1) (Payroll Tax Entries) Below is a payroll sheet for Otis Import plc for the month of
September 2022. Assume a 10% income tax rate for all employees and an 8% Social Security tax on
employee and employer.
Name
Earnings 
to Aug. 31
September 
Earnings
Income Tax 
Withholding
Social 
Security
B.D. Williams
£ 6,800
£ 800
D. Raye
6,500
700
K. Baker
7,600
1,100
F. Lopez
13,600
1,900
A. Daniels
105,000
13,000
B. Kingston
112,000
16,000
Instructions
a. Complete the payroll sheet and make the necessary entry to record the payment of the payroll.
b. Make the entry to record the payroll tax expenses of Otis Import.
c. Make the entry to record the payment of the payroll liabilities created. Assume that the company
pays all payroll liabilities at the end of each month.
P13.5 (LO 2) 
 (Warranties) Brooks Ltd. sells computers under a 2-year warranty contract
that requires the company to replace defective parts and to provide the necessary repair labor. During
2022, Brooks sells for cash 400 computers at a unit price of £2,500. On the basis of past experience,
the 2-year warranty costs are estimated to be £155 for parts and £185 for labor per unit. (For simplicity,
assume that all sales occurred on December 31, 2022.) The warranty is not sold separately from the
computer.

--- Page 1104 ---
Instructions
a. Record any necessary journal entries in 2022.
b. What liability relative to these transactions would appear on the December 31, 2022, statement of
financial position and how would it be classified?
c. In 2023, the actual warranty costs to Brooks were £21,400 for parts and £39,900 for labor. Record
any necessary journal entries in 2023.
P13.6 (LO 2) (Extended Warranties) Dos Passos SA sells televisions at an average price of R$900
and also offers to each customer a separate 3-year warranty contract for R$90 that requires the
company to perform periodic services and to replace defective parts. During 2022, the company sold
300 televisions and 270 warranty contracts for cash. It estimates the 3-year warranty costs as R$20 for
parts and R$40 for labor, and accounts for warranties separately. Assume sales occurred on December
31, 2022, and straight-line recognition of warranty revenues occurs.
Instructions
a. Record any necessary journal entries in 2022.
b. What liability relative to these transactions would appear on the December 31, 2022, statement of
financial position, and how would it be classified?
In 2023, Dos Passos incurred actual costs relative to 2022 television warranty sales of R$2,000 for
parts and R$4,000 for labor.
c. Record any necessary journal entries in 2023 relative to 2022 television warranties.
d. What amounts relative to the 2022 television warranties would appear on the December 31, 2023,
statement of financial position, and how would they be classified?
P13.7 (LO 2) (Warranties) Alvarado Company sells a machine for $7,400 with a 12-month warranty
agreement that requires the company to replace all defective parts and to provide the repair labor at no
cost to the customers. With sales being made evenly throughout the year, the company sells 600
machines in 2022 (warranty expenditures are expected half in 2022 and half in 2023). As a result of
product testing, the company estimates that the total warranty cost is $390 per machine ($170 parts
and $220 labor).
Instructions
Assuming that actual warranty expenditures occur exactly as estimated, what journal entries would be
made relative to the following facts?
a. Sale of machinery and warranty expenditures occur in 2022.
b. Warranty accrual on December 31, 2022.
c. Warranty expenditures occur in 2023.
d. What amount, if any, is disclosed in the statement of financial position as a liability for future
warranty expenditures as of December 31, 2022?
P13.8 (LO 2) (Premium Entries) To stimulate the sales of its Alladin breakfast cereal, Loptien NV
places 1 coupon in each box. Five coupons are redeemable for a premium consisting of a children’s
hand puppet. In 2023, the company purchases 40,000 puppets at €1.50 each and sells 480,000 boxes
of Alladin at €3.75 a box. From its experience with other similar premium offers, the company
estimates that 40% of the coupons issued will be mailed back for redemption. During 2023, 115,000
coupons are presented for redemption.
Instructions

--- Page 1105 ---
Prepare the journal entries that should be recorded in 2023 relative to the premium plan.
P13.9 (LO 2, 4) (Premium Entries and Financial Statement Presentation) Sycamore Candy
offers an MP3 download (seven-single medley) as a premium for every five candy bar wrappers
presented by customers together with £2.50. The candy bars are sold by the company to distributors for
£0.30 each. The purchase price of each download code to the company is £2.25. In addition, it costs
£0.50 to distribute each code. The results of the premium plan for the years 2022 and 2023 are as
follows. (All purchases and sales are for cash.)
2022
2023
MP3 codes purchased
250,000
330,000
Candy bars sold
2,895,400 2,743,600
Wrappers redeemed
1,200,000 1,500,000
2022 wrappers expected to be redeemed in 2023
290,000
2023 wrappers expected to be redeemed in 2024
350,000
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries that should be made in 2022 and 2023 to record the transactions
related to the premium plan of Sycamore Candy.
b. Indicate the account names, amounts, and classifications of the items related to the premium plan
that would appear on the statement of financial position and the income statement at the end of
2022 and 2023.
P13.10 (LO 2, 3) 
 (Litigation Claim: Entries and Essay) On November 24, 2021, 26
passengers on Wong Airlines Flight No. 901 were injured upon landing when the plane skidded off the
runway. Personal injury suits for damages totaling NT$9,000,000 were filed on January 11, 2022,
against the airline by 18 injured passengers. The airline carries no insurance. Legal counsel has studied
each suit and advised Wong that it can reasonably expect to pay 60% of the damages claimed. The
financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, were authorized for issuance on February
27, 2022.
Instructions
a. Prepare any disclosures and journal entries required by the airline in preparation of the December
31, 2021, financial statements.
b. Ignoring the November 24, 2021, accident, what liability due to the risk of loss from lack of
insurance coverage should Wong Airlines record or disclose? During the past decade, the company
has experienced at least one accident per year and incurred average damages of NT$3,200,000.
Discuss fully.
P13.11 (LO 2, 3) 
 (Contingencies: Entries and Essays) Polska SA, in preparation of its
December 31, 2022, financial statements, is attempting to determine the proper accounting treatment
for each of the following situations.
1. As a result of uninsured accidents during the year, personal injury suits for €350,000 and €60,000
have been filed against the company. It is the judgment of Polska’s legal counsel that an
unfavorable outcome is unlikely in the €60,000 case but that an unfavorable verdict
approximating €250,000 will probably result in the €350,000 case.
2. Polska owns a subsidiary in a foreign country that has a book value of €5,725,000 and an
estimated fair value of €9,500,000. The foreign government has communicated to Polska its
intention to expropriate the assets and business of all foreign investors. On the basis of

--- Page 1106 ---
settlements other firms have received from this same country, it is virtually certain that Polska
will receive 40% of the fair value of its properties as final settlement.
3. Polska’s chemical product division, consisting of five plants, is uninsurable because of the special
risk of injury to employees and losses due to fire and explosion. The year 2022 is considered one of
the safest (luckiest) in the division’s history because no loss due to injury or casualty was suffered.
Having suffered an average of three casualties a year during the rest of the past decade (ranging
from €60,000 to €700,000), management is certain that next year the company will probably not
be so fortunate.
4. Polska operates profitably from a factory it has leased. During 2022, Polska decides to relocate
these operations to a new factory. The lease of the old factory continues for the next 5 years. The
lease cannot be cancelled and the factory cannot be subleased. Polska determines that the cost to
settle the old lease is €950,000.
5. Litigation is being pursued for the recovery of €1,300,000 consulting fees on a failed project. The
directors believe it is more likely than not that their claim will be successful.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries that should be recorded as of December 31, 2022, to recognize each of
the situations above.
b. Indicate what should be reported relative to each situation in the financial statements and
accompanying notes. Explain why.
P13.12 (LO 2) (Warranties and Premiums) Garison Music Emporium carries a wide variety of
musical instruments, sound reproduction equipment, recorded music, and sheet music. Garison uses
two sales promotion techniques—warranties and premiums—to attract customers.
Musical instruments and sound equipment are sold with a 1-year warranty for replacement of parts
and labor. The estimated warranty cost, based on past experience, is 2% of sales.
The premium is offered on the recorded and sheet music. Customers receive a coupon for each dollar
spent on recorded music or sheet music. Customers may exchange 200 coupons and $20 for an MP3
player. Garison pays $32 for each player and estimates that 60% of the coupons given to customers will
be redeemed.
Garison’s total sales for 2022 were $7,200,000—$5,700,000 from musical instruments and sound
reproduction equipment and $1,500,000 from recorded music and sheet music. Replacement parts and
labor for warranty work totaled $94,000 during 2022. A total of 6,500 players used in the premium
program were purchased during the year, and there were 1,200,000 coupons redeemed in 2022.
The balances in the accounts related to warranties and premiums on January 1, 2022, were as shown
below.
Inventory of Premiums $ 37,600
Premium Liability
44,800
Warranty Liability
136,000
Instructions
Garison Music Emporium is preparing its financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Determine the amounts that will be shown on the 2022 financial statements for the following.
a. Warranty Expense.
b. Warranty Liability.
c. Premium Expense.

--- Page 1107 ---
d. Inventory of Premiums.
e. Premium Liability.
P13.13 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 
 (Liability Errors) You are the independent auditor engaged
to audit Millay Ltd.’s December 31, 2022, financial statements. Millay manufactures household
appliances. During the course of your audit, you discover the following situations.
1. Millay began production of a new dishwasher in June 2022 and, by December 31, 2022, sold
120,000 to various retailers for £500 each. Each dishwasher is under a one-year warranty. The
company estimates that its warranty expense per dishwasher will amount to £25. At year-end, the
company had already paid out £1,000,000 in warranty expenses. Millay’s income statement shows
warranty expenses of £1,000,000 for 2022.
2. Millayʼs attorney, Morgan Chye, Esq., has informed you that Millay has been cited for dumping
toxic waste into the Loden River. Clean-up costs and fines amount to £2,750,000. Although the
case is still being contested, Chye is certain that Millay will most probably have to pay the fine and
clean-up costs. No disclosure of this situation was found in the financial statements.
3. Millay is also the defendant in a patent infringement lawsuit by Megan Drabek over Millay’s use of
a hydraulic compressor in several of its products. Chye claims that if the suit goes against Millay
the loss may be as much as £5,000,000. However, Chye believes the loss of this suit is only a
possibility. Again, no mention of this suit is made in the financial statements.
As presented, these situations are not reported in accordance with IFRS, which may create problems in
issuing a favorable audit report. You feel the need to note these problems in the work papers.
Instructions
Heading each page with the name of the company, the statement of financial position date, and a brief
description of the problem, write a brief narrative for each of the above issues in the form of a
memorandum to be incorporated in the audit work papers. Explain what led to the discovery of each
problem, what the problem really is, and what you advised your client to do (along with any
appropriate journal entries) in order to bring these situations in accordance with IFRS.
P13.14 (LO 2) (Warranty and Coupon Computation) Schmitt Company must make
computations and adjusting entries for the following independent situations at December 31, 2022.
1. Its line of amplifiers carries a 3-year assurance-type warranty against defects. On the basis of past
experience, the estimated warranty costs related to dollar sales are: first year after sale—2% of
sales; second year after sale—3% of sales; and third year after sale—5% of sales. Sales and actual
warranty expenditures for the first 3 years of business were:
Sales
Warranty
Expenditures
2021 $ 800,000
$ 6,500
2022
1,100,000
17,200
2023
1,200,000
62,000
Instructions
Compute the amount that Schmitt Company should report as a liability in its December 31, 2023,
statement of financial position. Assume that all sales are made evenly throughout each year with
warranty expenses also evenly spaced relative to the rates above.
2. With some of its products, Schmitt Company includes coupons that are redeemable in
merchandise. The coupons have no expiration date and, in the company’s experience, 40% of them

--- Page 1108 ---
are redeemed. The liability for unredeemed coupons at December 31, 2021, was $9,000. During
2022, coupons worth $30,000 were issued, and merchandise worth $8,000 was distributed in
exchange for coupons redeemed.
Instructions
Compute the amount of the liability that should appear on the December 31, 2022, statement of
financial position.
Concepts for Analysis
(Unless instructed otherwise, round answers to nearest currency unit. Interest rates are per annum
unless otherwise indicated.)
CA13.1 (LO 1) (Nature of Liabilities) Presented below is the current liabilities section of Micro SE
(amounts in thousands).
2022
2021
Current liabilities
Notes payable
€ 68,713
€ 7,700
Accounts payable
179,496
101,379
Compensation to employees
60,312
31,649
Accrued liabilities
158,198
77,621
Income taxes payable
10,486
26,491
Current maturities of long-term debt
16,592
6,649
Total current liabilities
€493,797 €251,489
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What are the essential characteristics that make an item a liability?
b. What distinguishes a current liability from a non-current liability?
c. What are accrued liabilities? Give three examples of accrued liabilities that Micro might have.
d. What is the theoretically correct way to value liabilities? How are current liabilities usually
valued?
e. Why are notes payable often reported first in the current liabilities section?
f. What might be the items that comprise Micro’s liability for “Compensation to employees”?
CA13.2 (LO 1) (Current versus Non-Current Classification) Rodriguez Corporation includes the
following items in its liabilities at December 31, 2021.
1. Notes payable, $25,000,000, due June 30, 2022.
2. Deposits from customers on equipment ordered by them from Rodriguez, $6,250,000.
3. Salaries payable, $3,750,000, due January 14, 2022.
Instructions
Indicate in what circumstances, if any, each of the three liabilities above would be excluded from
current liabilities.

--- Page 1109 ---
CA13.3 (LO 1) 
 (Refinancing of Short-Term Debt) Kobayashi Ltd. reports in the current
liability section of its statement of financial position at December 31, 2021 (its year-end), short-term
obligations of ¥15,000,000, which includes the current portion of 12% long-term debt in the amount of
¥10,000,000 (matures in March 2022). Management has stated its intention to refinance the 12% debt
so that no portion of it will mature during 2022. The date of issuance of the financial statements is
March 25, 2022.
Instructions
a. Is management’s intention enough to support long-term classification of the obligation in this
situation?
b. Assume that Kobayashi Ltd. issues ¥13,000,000 of 10-year debentures to the public in January
2022 and that management expects to use the proceeds to liquidate the ¥10,000,000 debt
maturing in March 2022. Furthermore, assume that the debt maturing in March 2022 is paid from
these proceeds prior to the authorization to issue the financial statements. Will this have any
impact on the statement of financial position classification at December 31, 2021? Explain your
answer.
c. Assume that Kobayashi Ltd. issues ordinary shares to the public in January and that management
expects to entirely liquidate the ¥10,000,000 debt maturing in March 2022 with the proceeds of
this equity securities issue. In light of these events, should the ¥10,000,000 debt maturing in
March 2022 be included in current liabilities at December 31, 2021?
d. Assume that Kobayashi Ltd., on February 15, 2022, entered into a financing agreement with a
commercial bank that permits Kobayashi to borrow at any time through 2023 up to ¥15,000,000
at the bank’s prime rate of interest. Borrowings under the financing agreement mature 3 years
after the date of the loan. The agreement is not cancelable except for violation of a provision with
which compliance is objectively determinable. No violation of any provision exists at the date of
issuance of the financial statements. Assume further that the current portion of long-term debt
does not mature until August 2022. In addition, management may refinance the ¥10,000,000
obligation under the terms of the financial agreement with the bank, which is expected to be
financially capable of honoring the agreement. Given these facts, should the ¥10,000,000 be
classified as current on the statement of financial position at December 31, 2021?
CA13.4 (LO 3) 
 (Contingencies) On February 1, 2022, a huge storage tank owned by Viking
Manufacturing exploded. Windows in houses and other buildings within a 1-mile radius of the
explosion were severely damaged, and a number of people were injured. As of February 15, 2022 (when
the December 31, 2021, financial statements were completed and sent to the publisher for printing and
public distribution), no suits had been filed or claims asserted against the company as a consequence
of the explosion. The company fully anticipates that suits will be filed and claims asserted for injuries
and damages. Because the casualty was uninsured and the company considered at fault, Viking
Manufacturing will have to cover the damages from its own resources.
Instructions
Discuss fully the accounting treatment and disclosures that should be accorded the casualty and
related contingent losses in the financial statements dated December 31, 2021.
CA13.5 (LO 2) (Possible Environmental Liability) Presented below is a note disclosure for
Matsui Group.

--- Page 1110 ---
Litigation and Environmental: Matsui has been notified or is a named or a potentially
responsible party in a number of governmental and private actions associated with environmental
matters. These actions seek clean-up costs, penalties and/or damages for personal injury or to
property or natural resources.
In 2022, the Company recorded a pretax charge of ¥56,229,000, included in the “Other expense
(income)—net” caption of the Company’s consolidated income statements, as an additional
provision for environmental matters. These expenditures are expected to take place over the next
several years and are indicative of the Company’s commitment to improve and maintain the
environment in which it operates. At December 31, 2022, environmental accruals amounted to
¥69,931,000, of which ¥61,535,000 are considered non-current and are included in the “Non-
current liability” caption of the Company’s consolidated statements of financial position.
While it is impossible at this time to determine with certainty the ultimate outcome of
environmental matters, it is management’s opinion, based in part on the advice of independent
counsel (after taking into account accruals and insurance coverage applicable to such actions) that
when the costs are finally determined they will not have a material adverse effect on the financial
position of the Company.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What conditions must exist before a provision can be recorded in the accounts?
b. Suppose that Matsui could not reasonably estimate the amount of the loss, although it could
establish with a high degree of probability the minimum and maximum loss possible. How should
this information be reported in the financial statements?
c. If the amount of the loss is uncertain, how would the potential liability be reported in the financial
statements?
CA13.6 (LO 2) (Warranties and Litigation Provisions) The following two independent
situations involve litigation provisions.
Part 1: Benson plc sells two products, Grey and Yellow. Each carries a 1-year warranty.
1. Product Grey—Product warranty costs, based on past experience, will normally be 1% of sales.
2. Product Yellow—Product warranty costs cannot be reasonably estimated because this is a new
product line. However, the chief engineer believes that product warranty costs are likely to be
incurred.
Instructions
How should Benson report the estimated product warranty costs for each of the two types of
merchandise above? Discuss the rationale for your answer. Do not discuss disclosures that should be
made in Benson’s financial statements or notes.
Part 2: Constantine Ltd. is being sued for £4,000,000 for an injury caused to a child as a result of
alleged negligence while the child was visiting the Constantine plant in March 2022. The suit was filed
in July 2022. Constantine’s lawyer states that it is probable that Constantine will lose the suit and be
found liable for a judgment costing anywhere from £400,000 to £2,000,000. However, the lawyer
states that the most probable judgment is £1,000,000.
Instructions
How should Constantine report the suit in its 2022 financial statements? Discuss the rationale for your
answer. Include in your answer disclosures, if any, that should be made in Constantine’s financial
statements or notes.

--- Page 1111 ---
CA13.7 (LO 2) 
 (Ethics of Warranties) The Dotson Company, owner of Bleacher Mall,
charges Rich Clothing Store a rental fee of $600 per month plus 5% of yearly profits over $500,000.
Matt Rich, the owner of the store, directs his accountant, Ron Hamilton, to increase the estimate of
bad debt expense and warranty costs in order to keep profits at $475,000.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. Should Hamilton follow his boss’s directive?
b. Who is harmed if the estimates are increased?
c. Is Matt Rich’s directive ethical?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s complete annual
report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following questions.
a. What was the composition of M&S’s borrowings and other financial liabilities shown in its current
liability section at March 30, 2019?
b. What was M&S’s March 30, 2019, working capital and current ratio? Comment on M&S’s liquidity.
c. What types of commitments and contingencies has M&S reported in its financial statements?
What is management’s reaction to these contingencies?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B and C,
respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. How much working capital do each of these companies have at the end of 2018?
b. Compute both companies’ (a) current cash debt coverage, (b) cash debt coverage, (c) current ratio,
(d) acid-test ratio, (e) accounts receivable turnover, and (f) inventory turnover for 2018. Comment
on each company’s overall liquidity.
c. What types of loss or gain contingencies do these two companies have at the end of 2018?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1 Northland Cranberries
Despite being a publicly traded company only since 1987, Northland Cranberries (USA) of
Wisconsin Rapids, Wisconsin, is one of the world’s largest cranberry growers. Despite its short life as a
publicly traded company, it has engaged in an aggressive growth strategy. As a consequence, the

--- Page 1112 ---
company has taken on significant amounts of both short-term and long-term debt. The following
information is taken from recent annual reports of the company.
Current
Year
Prior
Year
Current assets
$ 6,745,759 $ 5,598,054
Total assets
107,744,751
83,074,339
Current liabilities
10,168,685
4,484,687
Total liabilities
73,118,204
49,948,787
Shareholders’ equity
34,626,547
33,125,552
Net sales
21,783,966
18,051,355
Cost of goods sold
13,057,275
8,751,220
Interest expense
3,654,006
2,393,792
Income tax expense
1,051,000
1,917,000
Net income
1,581,707
2,942,954
Instructions
a. Evaluate the company’s liquidity by calculating and analyzing working capital and the current
ratio.
b. The following discussion of the company’s liquidity was provided by the company in the
Management Discussion and Analysis section of the company’s annual report. Comment on
whether you agree with management’s statements, and what might be done to remedy the
situation.
The lower comparative current ratio in the current year was due to $3 million of short-term borrowing
then outstanding which was incurred to fund the Yellow River Marsh acquisitions last year. As a result
of the extreme seasonality of its business, the company does not believe that its current ratio or its
underlying stated working capital at the current, fiscal year-end is a meaningful indication of the
Company’s liquidity. As of March 31 of each fiscal year, the Company has historically carried no
significant amounts of inventories and by such date all of the Company’s accounts receivable from its
crop sold for processing under the supply agreements have been paid in cash, with the resulting cash
received from such payments used to reduce indebtedness. The Company utilizes its revolving bank
credit facility, together with cash generated from operations, to fund its working capital requirements
throughout its growing season.
Case 2 Suzuki Group
Presented below is the current liabilities section and related note of Suzuki Group.
(yen in millions)
Current Year Prior Year
Current liabilities
Current portion of long-term debt
¥ 15,000
¥ 10,000
Short-term debt
2,668
405
Accounts payable
29,495
42,427
Accrued warranty
16,843
16,741
Accrued marketing programs
17,512
16,585
Other accrued liabilities
35,653
33,290

--- Page 1113 ---
Accrued and deferred income taxes
16,206
17,348
Total current liabilities
¥133,377
¥136,796
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Note 1 (in part): Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Related Data
Accrued Warranty The company provides an accrual for future warranty costs based upon the
relationship of prior years’ sales to actual warranty costs.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What type of warranty is Suzuki providing to customers?
b. Under what circumstance, if any, would it be appropriate for Suzuki to recognize unearned
revenue on warranty contracts?
c. If Suzuki recognized unearned revenue on warranty contracts, how would it recognize this revenue
in subsequent periods?
Case 3 BOP Clothing Co.
As discussed in the chapter, an important consideration in evaluating current liabilities is a company’s
operating cycle. The operating cycle is the average time required to go from cash to cash in generating
revenue. To determine the length of the operating cycle, analysts use two measures: the average days
to sell inventory (inventory-days) and the average days to collect receivables (receivable-days). The
inventory-days computation measures the average number of days it takes to move an item from raw
materials or purchase to final sale (from the day it comes in the company’s door to the point it is
converted to cash or an account receivable). The receivable-days computation measures the average
number of days it takes to collect an account.
Most businesses must then determine how to finance the period of time when the liquid assets are tied
up in inventory and accounts receivable. To determine how much to finance, companies first determine
accounts-payable-days—how long it takes to pay creditors. Accounts-payable-days measure the number
of days it takes to pay a supplier invoice. Consider the following operating cycle worksheet for BOP
Clothing Co.
2021
2022
Cash
$
45,000
$
30,000
Accounts receivable
250,000
325,000
Inventory
830,000
800,000
Accounts payable
720,000
775,000
Purchases
1,100,000
1,425,000
Cost of goods sold
1,145,000
1,455,000
Sales
1,750,000
1,950,000
Operating Cycle
Inventory days1
264.6
200.7
Receivable days2
52.1
60.8
Operating cycle
316.7
261.5
Less: Accounts payable days3
238.9
198.5
Days to be financed
77.8
63.0
Working capital
$ 405,000
$ 380,000

--- Page 1114 ---
Current ratio
1.56
1.49
Acid-test ratio
0.41
0.46
1Inventory-days = (Inventory × 365) ÷ Cost of goods sold
2Receivable-days = (Accounts receivable × 365) ÷ Sales
3Accounts-payable-days = (Accounts payable × 365) ÷ Purchases
Purchases = Cost of goods sold + Ending inventory − Beginning inventory. The ratios above assume
that other current assets and liabilities are negligible.
These data indicate that BOP has reduced its overall operating cycle (to 261.5 days) as well as the
number of days to be financed with sources of funds other than accounts payable (from 78 to 63 days).
Most businesses cannot finance the operating cycle with accounts payable financing alone, so working
capital financing, usually short-term interest-bearing loans, is needed to cover the shortfall. In this
case, BOP would need to borrow less money to finance its operating cycle in 2022 than in 2021.
Instructions
a. Use the BOP analysis to briefly discuss how the operating cycle data relate to the amount of
working capital and the current and acid-test ratios.
b. Select two other real companies that are in the same industry and complete the operating cycle
worksheet (similar to that prepared for BOP), along with the working capital and ratio analysis.
Briefly summarize and interpret the results. To simplify the analysis, you may use ending balances
to compute turnover ratios.
(Adapted from Operating Cycle Worksheet at www.entrepreneur.com)
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
YellowCard ASA manufactures accessories for iPods, iPhones, and iPads. It had the following selected
transactions during calendar 2022. (For any part of this problem requiring an interest or discount rate,
use 10%.)
1. YellowCard provides a 2-year warranty on its docking stations, which it began selling in 2022.
YellowCard estimates that €45,000 will be spent in the future to service warranties related to 2022
sales. During 2022, YellowCard spent €6,000 servicing warranty claims.
2. YellowCard has a 1-year €200,000 loan outstanding from UBS. The loan is set to mature on
February 28, 2023. For several years, UBS has agreed to extend the loan, as long as YellowCard
makes all of its quarterly interest payments (interest is due on the last days of each February, May,
August, and November) and maintains an acid-test ratio (also called quick ratio) of at least 1.25.
On December 10, 2022, UBS provided YellowCard a commitment letter indicating that UBS will
extend the loan another 12 months, provided that YellowCard makes the interest payment due on
February 28.
3. During 2021, YellowCard constructed a small facility specifically to manufacture one particular
accessory. YellowCard paid the construction contractor €5,000,000 cash (which was the total
contract price) and placed the facility into service on January 1, 2022. Because of technological
changes, YellowCard anticipates that the manufacturing facility will be useful for no more than 10
years. The local government where the facility is located required that, at the end of the 10-year
period, YellowCard remediate the facility so that it can be used as a community center. YellowCard
estimates the cost of remediation in the future to be €500,000.
Accounting

--- Page 1115 ---
Prepare all 2022 journal entries relating to (a) YellowCard’s warranties, (b) YellowCard’s loan from
UBS, and (c) the new manufacturing facility that YellowCard opened on January 1, 2022.
Analysis
Describe how the transactions above affect ratios that might be used to assess YellowCard’s liquidity.
How important is the commitment letter that YellowCard has from UBS to these ratios?
Principles
YellowCard is contemplating offering an extended warranty. If customers pay an additional €50 at the
time of product purchase, YellowCard would extend the warranty an additional 2 years. Would the
extended warranty meet the definition of a liability under IFRS? Briefly explain.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 4, The Elements of Financial
Statements” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 4.26.
[2] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.: IASB,
2007), par. BC48.
[3] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.: IASB,
2020).
[4] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits (London, U.K.: IASB, 2001).
[5] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001).
[6] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 14.
[7] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 36.
[8] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), paras. 63–65.
[9] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 68.
[10] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 82.
[11] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), paras. 80–82.
[12] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), paras. 84–92.
[13] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), paras. 27–35.
[14] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
(London, U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 10.
Research Case
Hincapie AG manufactures specialty bike accessories. The company is best known for its product
quality, and it has offered one of the best warranties in the industry on its higher-priced items—a
lifetime guarantee. The warranty on these products is included in the sales price. Hincapie has a

--- Page 1116 ---
contract with a service company, which performs all warranty work on Hincapie products. Under the
contract, Hincapie guarantees the service company at least €200,000 of warranty work for each year of
the 3-year contract.
A recent economic recession has been hard on Hincapie’s business. Sales for its higher-end products
have been especially adversely impacted. As a result, Hincapie is planning to restructure its high-
quality lines by moving manufacturing for those products into one of its other factories, shutting down
assembly lines, and terminating workers. In order to keep some workers on board, Hincapie plans to
bring all warranty work in-house. It can terminate the current warranty contract by making a one-time
termination payment of €75,000.
Management discussed the restructuring plans in November 2021; they plan to get approval from the
board of directors at the December board meeting and execute the restructuring in early 2022. Given
the company’s past success, the accounting for restructuring activities has never come up. Hincapie
would like you to research how it should account for this restructuring according to IFRS.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS access at
this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet
browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the accounting literature that addresses the accounting for the various restructuring costs
that will be incurred in the restructuring.
b. Advise Hincapie on the restructuring costs. When should Hincapie recognize liabilities arising
from the restructuring? What costs can be included? What costs are excluded?
c. Does Hincapie have a liability related to the service contract? Explain. If Hincapie has a liability, at
what amount should it be recorded?
Notes
1 This illustration is not just a theoretical exercise. In practice, a number of preference share issues
have all the characteristics of a debt instrument, except that they are called and legally classified as
preference shares. In some cases, taxing authorities have even permitted companies to treat the
dividend payments as interest expense for tax purposes.
2 The IASB also indicates two other conditions that occur infrequently. The first is that if the liability is
held primarily for trading purposes, it should be reported as a current liability. Trading means that
the liability is subject to selling or repurchasing in the short term. These liabilities are recorded at
fair value, and gains or losses are reported in income. In addition, if a liability in a company does not
have an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least 12 months after the
reporting date, it is classified as current.
3 Refinancing a short-term obligation on a long-term basis means either replacing it with a long-term
obligation or equity securities, or renewing, extending, or replacing it with short-term obligations for
an uninterrupted period extending beyond one year (or the normal operating cycle) from the date of
the company’s statement of financial position.
4 A manufacturing company allocates all of the payroll costs (wages, payroll taxes, and fringe benefits)
to appropriate cost accounts such as Direct Labor, Indirect Labor, Sales Salaries, Administrative
Salaries, and the like. This abbreviated and somewhat simplified discussion of payroll costs and
deductions is not indicative of the volume of records and clerical work that may be involved in
maintaining a sound and accurate payroll system.
5 Companies provide postemployment benefits to past or inactive employees after employment
but prior to retirement. Examples include salary continuation, supplemental unemployment
benefits, severance pay, job training, and continuation of health and life insurance coverage.

--- Page 1117 ---
6 Some companies have obligations for benefits paid to employees after they retire. The accounting and
reporting standards for postretirement benefit payments are complex. These standards relate to two
different types of postretirement benefits: (1) pensions, and (2) postretirement healthcare and
life insurance benefits. We discuss these issues extensively in Chapter 20.
7 The term provision can be confusing because it can describe a liability, a valuation account, or an
expense. It is most commonly used to describe a liability and therefore is used as such in this
chapter.
8 The distinction is important because provisions are subject to disclosure requirements that do not
apply to other types of payables.
9 We provide expanded discussion of performance obligations, such as those reflected in warranties
and premiums, in Chapter 18.
10 A commentary in the financial magazine Forbes (June 15, 1974), p. 42, stated its position on this
matter quite succinctly: “The simple and unquestionable fact of life is this: Business is cyclical and
full of unexpected surprises. Is it the role of accounting to disguise this unpleasant fact and create a
fairyland of smoothly rising earnings? Or, should accounting reflect reality, warts and all—floods,
expropriations and all manner of rude shocks?”
11 This type of situation is often referred to as “an incurred but not recorded” (IBNR) provision. A
company may not be able to identify the claims giving rise to the obligation, but it knows a past
obligating event has occurred.
Source: IASB, “Provisions-Targeted Improvements,” IASB Update (January 2020).

--- Page 1118 ---
