CHAPTER 9
Inventories: Additional Valuation Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
2. Identify other inventory valuation issues.
3. Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
4. Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.
5. Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 9
As the following opening story indicates, information on inventories helps to predict
financial performance—in particular, profits. In this chapter, we discuss some of the
valuation and estimation concepts that companies use to develop relevant inventory
information. The content and organization of the chapter are as follows.
Not What It Seems to Be
Investors need comparable information about inventory when evaluating a retailer’s
financial statements. For a complete assessment, investors need to determine what
inventory method a retailer is using (e.g., FIFO, average-cost, or a combination of methods)
and then adjust the company’s financial information to a common method. That is a good
start. Subsequently, investors compute relevant metrics about the company such as
inventory turnover, number of days sales in inventory, gross profit rate, and liquidity
measures such as the current ratio.

--- Page 704 ---
These calculations are critical. Inventory is a significant component of working capital, and
the gross profit resulting from sales of inventory is often viewed as the most important
income component in measuring a retailer’s progress. For example, consider the financial
statements of a typical grocery retailer, Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL), shown in the
following table. Inventory comprises over 36 percent of current assets, and gross profit
represents 27 percent of sales revenue.
Ahold Delhaize (in millions)
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Income Statement
Current Assets
Sales revenue
€62,791
Other current assets
€ 765 Cost of sales
45,839
Inventories
3,196 Gross profit
€16,952
Receivables
1,759
Cash and cash equivalents
3,122 Net income
€ 1,793
Total current assets
€8,842
Analysis can be conducted based on these numbers. However, there are often still questions
about the reliability of the information reported in the financial statements. That is,
subjective estimates are involved because of the possible impairment of the inventory.
As indicated in the following table, Ahold’s disclosures of its subjective estimates concerning
the measurement and valuation of inventory (related to markdowns and inventory losses)
could have a significant impact on an investor’s ability to compare inventory levels (and their
impact on gross profit) at Ahold over time and relative to other retailers.
Thus, inventory balances may not be what they seem, not only due to the cost flow
assumptions (e.g., FIFO/weighted-average) you learned about in Chapter 8 but also due to
significant markdowns and losses that you will learn about in this chapter.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions,
are also available online.

--- Page 705 ---
Lower-of-Cost-or-Net Realizable Value (LCNRV)
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
Inventories are recorded at their cost. However, if inventory declines in value below its
original cost, a major departure from the historical cost principle occurs. Whatever the
reason for a decline—obsolescence, price-level changes, or damaged goods—a company
should write down the inventory to net realizable value to report this loss. A company
abandons the historical cost principle when the future utility (revenue-
producing ability) of the asset drops below its original cost.
Net Realizable Value
Recall that cost is the acquisition price of inventory computed using one of the historical
cost-based methods—specific identification, average-cost, or FIFO. The term net realizable
value (NRV) refers to the net amount that a company expects to realize from the sale of
inventory. Specifically, net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the normal course
of business less estimated costs to complete and to make a sale. [1] (See the Authoritative
Literature References section near the end of the chapter.)
To illustrate, assume that Mander AG has unfinished inventory with a cost of €950, a sales
value of €1,000, estimated cost of completion of €50, and estimated selling costs of €200.
Mander’s net realizable value is computed as shown in Illustration 9.1.
Inventory value—unfinished
€1,000
Less: Estimated cost of completion € 50
Estimated cost to sell
200
250
Net realizable value
€ 750
ILLUSTRATION 9.1 Computation of Net Realizable Value
Mander reports inventory on its statement of financial position at €750. In its income
statement, Mander reports a Loss on Inventory Write-Down of €200 (€950 − €750). A
departure from cost is justified because inventories should not be reported at amounts
higher than their expected realization from sale or use. In addition, a company like Mander
should charge the loss of utility against revenues in the period in which the loss occurs, not
in the period of sale.
Companies therefore report their inventories at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable
value (LCNRV) at each reporting date. Illustration 9.2 shows how two companies
indicate measurement at LCNRV.

--- Page 706 ---
Nokia (FIN)
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using
standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a FIFO basis. Net realizable value is the
amount that can be realized from the sale of the inventory in the normal course of business
after allowing for the costs of realization. In addition to the cost of materials and direct
labor, an appropriate proportion of production overhead is included in the inventory values.
An allowance is recorded for excess inventory and obsolescence based on the lower-of-cost-
or-net realizable value.
Carrefour Group (FRA)
In accordance with IAS 2 – Inventories, goods inventories and the inventories of the
property development business (properties under construction) are measured at the lower
of cost and net realisable value.
The cost of goods inventories corresponds to the latest purchase price plus all related
expenses. This method is appropriate given the rapid inventory turnover, and the resulting
values are close to those obtained by the first in-first out (FIFO) method. The cost of goods
inventories includes all components of the purchase cost of goods sold (with the exception
of exchange gains and losses) and takes into account the rebates and commercial income
negotiated with suppliers.
Net realisable value corresponds to the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of
business, less the estimated additional costs necessary to make the sale.
ILLUSTRATION 9.2 LCNRV Disclosures
Illustration of LCNRV
As indicated, a company values inventory at LCNRV. A company estimates net realizable
value based on the most reliable evidence of the inventories’ realizable amounts (expected
selling price, expected costs of completion, and expected costs to sell). [2] To illustrate, Jinn-
Feng Foods computes its inventory at LCNRV, as shown in Illustration 9.3 (amounts in
thousands).

--- Page 707 ---
Food
Cost
Net Realizable Value
Final Inventory Value
Spinach
¥ 80,000
¥120,000
¥ 80,000
Carrots
100,000
110,000
100,000
Cut beans
50,000
40,000
40,000
Peas
90,000
72,000
72,000
Mixed vegetables
95,000
92,000
92,000
¥384,000
Final Inventory Value:
Spinach
Cost (¥80,000) is selected because it is lower than net realizable value.
Carrots
Cost (¥100,000) is selected because it is lower than net realizable value.
Cut beans
Net realizable value (¥40,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
Peas
Net realizable value (¥72,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
Mixed vegetables Net realizable value (¥92,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
ILLUSTRATION 9.3 Determining Final Inventory Value
As indicated, the final inventory value of ¥384,000 equals the sum of the LCNRV for each of
the inventory items. That is, Jinn-Feng applies the LCNRV rule to each individual type of
food.
Methods of Applying LCNRV
In the Jinn-Feng Foods illustration, we assumed that the company applied the LCNRV rule
to each individual type of food. However, companies may apply the LCNRV rule to a group of
similar or related items, or to the total of the inventory. For example, in the textile industry,
sometimes it is not possible to determine selling price for each textile individually, and
therefore, it may be necessary to perform the net realizable value assessment on all textiles
that will be used to produce clothing for a particular season.1
If a company follows a similar-or-related-items or total-inventory approach in determining
LCNRV, increases in market prices tend to offset decreases in market prices. To illustrate,
assume that Jinn-Feng Foods separates its food products into two major groups, frozen and
canned, as shown in Illustration 9.4.

--- Page 708 ---
LCNRV by:
Cost
LCNRV
Individual Items Major Groups Total Inventory
Frozen
Spinach
¥ 80,000 ¥120,000
¥ 80,000
Carrots
100,000
110,000
100,000
Cut beans
50,000
40,000
40,000
Total frozen
230,000
270,000
¥230,000
Canned
Peas
90,000
72,000
72,000
Mixed vegetables
95,000
92,000
92,000
Total canned
185,000
164,000
164,000
Total
¥415,000 ¥434,000
¥384,000
¥394,000
¥415,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.4 Alternative Applications of LCNRV
If Jinn-Feng applies the LCNRV rule to individual items, the amount of inventory is
¥384,000. If Jinn-Feng applies the rule to major groups, it jumps to ¥394,000. If the
company applies LCNRV to the total inventory, it totals ¥415,000. Why this difference?
When a company uses a major group or total-inventory approach, net realizable values
higher than cost offset net realizable values lower than cost. For Jinn-Feng, using the
similar-or-related-items approach partially offsets the high net realizable value for spinach.
Using the total-inventory approach totally offsets it.2
In most situations, companies price inventory on an item-by-item basis. In fact, tax rules in
some countries require that companies use an individual-item basis barring practical
difficulties. In addition, the individual-item approach gives the lowest valuation for
statement of financial position purposes. In some cases, a company prices inventory on a
total-inventory basis when it offers only one end product (comprised of many different raw
materials). If it produces several end products, a company might use a similar-or-related-
items approach instead. Whichever method a company selects, it should apply the
method consistently from one period to another.3
Recording Net Realizable Value Instead of Cost
One of two methods may be used to record the income effect of valuing inventory at net
realizable value. One method, referred to as the cost-of-goods-sold method, debits cost of
goods sold for the write-down of the inventory to net realizable value. As a result, the
company does not report a loss in the income statement because the cost of goods sold
already includes the amount of the loss (see Underlying Concepts). The second method,
referred to as the loss method, debits a loss account for the write-down of the inventory to
net realizable value. We use the following inventory data for Ricardo SpA to illustrate entries
under both methods.

--- Page 709 ---
Underlying Concepts
The income statement under the cost-of-goods-sold method presentation lacks
representational faithfulness. That is, the cost-of-goods-sold method does not represent
what it purports to represent. However, allowing this presentation illustrates the
concept of materiality.
Cost of goods sold (before adjustment to net realizable value) €108,000
Ending inventory (cost)
82,000
Ending inventory (at net realizable value)
70,000
Illustration 9.5 shows the entries for both the cost-of-goods-sold and loss methods,
assuming the use of a perpetual inventory system.
ILLUSTRATION 9.5 Accounting for the Reduction of Inventory to Net
Realizable Value—Perpetual Inventory System
The cost-of-goods-sold method buries the loss in the Cost of Goods Sold account. The loss
method, by identifying the loss due to the write-down, shows the loss separate from Cost of
Goods Sold in the income statement.
Illustration 9.6 contrasts the differing amounts reported in the income statement under
the two approaches, using data from the Ricardo example.
IFRS does not specify a particular account to debit for the write-down. We believe the loss
method presentation is preferable because it clearly discloses the loss resulting from a
decline in inventory net realizable values.

--- Page 710 ---
Cost-of-Goods-Sold Method
Sales revenue
€200,000
Cost of goods sold (after adjustment to net realizable value*)
120,000
Gross profit on sales
€ 80,000
Loss Method
Sales revenue
€200,000
Cost of goods sold
108,000
Gross profit on sales
92,000
Loss due to decline of inventory to net realizable value
12,000
€ 80,000
*Cost of goods sold (before adjustment to net realizable value)
€108,000
Difference between inventory at cost and net realizable value (€82,000 −
€70,000)
12,000
Cost of goods sold (after adjustment to net realizable value)
€120,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.6 Income Statement Presentation—Cost-of-Goods-Sold and
Loss Methods of Reducing Inventory to Net Realizable Value
Use of an Allowance
Instead of crediting the Inventory account for net realizable value adjustments, companies
generally use an allowance account, often referred to as Allowance to Reduce Inventory to
Net Realizable Value. For example, using an allowance account under the loss method,
Ricardo SpA makes the following entry to record the inventory write-down to net realizable
value.
Loss Due to Decline of Inventory to Net Realizable Value 12,000
Allowance to Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable Value
12,000
Use of the allowance account results in reporting both the cost and the net realizable value of
the inventory. Ricardo reports inventory in the statement of financial position as shown in
Illustration 9.7.
Inventory (at cost)
€82,000
Less: Allowance to reduce inventory to net realizable value
12,000
Inventory at net realizable value
€70,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.7 Presentation of Inventory Using an Allowance Account
The use of the allowance under the cost-of-goods-sold or loss method permits both the
income statement and the statement of financial position to reflect inventory measured at
€82,000, although the statement of financial position shows a net amount of €70,000. It
also keeps subsidiary inventory ledgers and records in correspondence with the control
account without changing prices. For homework purposes, use an allowance account to
record net realizable value adjustments, unless instructed otherwise.

--- Page 711 ---
Recovery of Inventory Loss
In periods following the write-down, economic conditions may change such that the net
realizable value of inventories previously written down may be greater than cost, or there
may be clear evidence of an increase in the net realizable value. In this situation, the amount
of the write-down is reversed, with the reversal limited to the amount of the original write-
down. [4]
Continuing the Ricardo example, assume that in the subsequent period, market conditions
change, such that the net realizable value increases to €74,000 (an increase of €4,000). As a
result, only €8,000 is needed in the allowance. Ricardo makes the following entry, using the
loss method.
Allowance to Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable Value 4,000
Recovery of Inventory Loss (€74,000 − €70,000)
4,000
The allowance account is then adjusted in subsequent periods, such that
inventory is reported at the LCNRV. Illustration 9.8 shows the net realizable value
evaluation for Vuko Company and the effect of net realizable value adjustments on income.
Date
Inventory
at Cost
Inventory at Net
Realizable Value
Amount Required in
Allowance Account
Adjustment of
Allowance Account
Balance
Effect on
Net
Income
Dec.
31,
2022
 188,000
 176,000
 12,000
 12,000 inc. Decrease
Dec.
31,
2023
194,000
187,000
7,000
5,000 dec. Increase
Dec.
31,
2024
173,000
174,000
0
7,000 dec. Increase
Dec.
31,
2025
182,000
180,000
2,000
2,000 inc. Decrease
ILLUSTRATION 9.8 Effect on Net Income of Adjusting Inventory to Net
Realizable Value
If prices are falling, the company records an additional write-down. If prices are rising, the
company records an increase in income. We can think of the net increase as a recovery of a
previously recognized loss. Under no circumstances should the inventory be reported at a
value above original cost.
Evaluation of the LCNRV Rule
The LCNRV rule suffers from some conceptual deficiencies:
1. A company recognizes decreases in the value of the asset and the charge to expense in
the period in which the loss in utility occurs—not in the period of sale. On the other

--- Page 712 ---
hand, it recognizes increases in the value of the asset (in excess of original cost) only at
the point of sale. This inconsistent treatment can distort income data.
2. Application of the rule results in inconsistency because a company may value the
inventory at cost in one year and at net realizable value in the next year.
3. The LCNRV rule values the inventory in the statement of financial position
conservatively, but its effect on the income statement may or may not be conservative.
Net income for the year in which a company takes the loss is definitely lower. Net
income of the subsequent period may be higher than normal if the expected reductions
in sales price do not materialize.
Many financial statement users appreciate the LCNRV rule because they at least know that it
prevents overstatement of inventory. In addition, recognizing all losses but anticipating no
gains generally avoids overstatement of income.
Valuation Bases
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify other inventory valuation issues.
Net Realizable Value
For the most part, companies record inventory at LCNRV.4 However, there are some
situations in which companies depart from the LCNRV rule. Such treatment may be justified
in situations when cost is difficult to determine, the items are readily marketable at quoted
market prices, and units of product are interchangeable. In this section, we discuss two
common situations in which net realizable value is the general rule for valuing inventory:
Agricultural assets (including biological assets and agricultural produce).
Commodities held by broker-traders.
Agricultural Inventory
Under IFRS, net realizable value measurement is used for inventory when the inventory is
related to agricultural activity. In general, agricultural activity results in two types of
agricultural assets: (1) biological assets or (2) agricultural produce at the point of harvest.
[6]
A biological asset (classified as a non-current asset) is a living animal or plant, such as
sheep, cows, fruit trees, or cotton plants. Agricultural produce is the harvested product of
a biological asset, such as wool from a sheep, milk from a dairy cow, picked fruit from a fruit
tree, or cotton from a cotton plant. The accounting for these assets is as follows.
Biological assets are measured on initial recognition and at the end of each reporting
period at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). Companies record a gain or
loss due to changes in the net realizable value of biological assets in income when it
arises.5

--- Page 713 ---
Agricultural produce (which is harvested from biological assets) is measured at fair
value less costs to sell (net realizable value) at the point of harvest. Once harvested, the
net realizable value of the agricultural produce becomes its cost, and this asset is
accounted for similar to other inventories held for sale in the normal course of
business.6
Illustration of Agricultural Accounting at Net Realizable Value
To illustrate the accounting at net realizable value for agricultural assets, assume that
Bancroft Dairy produces milk for sale to local cheese makers. Bancroft begins operations on
January 1, 2022, by purchasing 420 milking cows for €460,000. Illustration 9.9 presents
Bancroft’s information related to the milking cows.
Milking cows
Carrying value, January 1, 2022*
€460,000
Change in fair value due to growth and price changes
€35,000
Decrease in fair value due to harvest
(1,200)
Change in carrying value
33,800
Carrying value, January 31, 2022
€493,800
Milk harvested during January**
€ 36,000
*The carrying value is measured at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). The fair
value of milking cows is determined based on market prices of livestock of similar age,
breed, and genetic merit.
**Milk is initially measured at its fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value) at the
time of milking. The fair value of milk is determined based on market prices in the local
area.
ILLUSTRATION 9.9 Agricultural Assets—Bancroft Dairy
As indicated, the carrying value of the milking cows increased during the month. Part of the
change is due to changes in market prices (less costs to sell) for milking cows (see
Underlying Concepts). The change in market price may also be affected by growth—the
increase in value as the cows mature and develop increased milking capacity. At the same
time, as mature cows are milked, their milking capacity declines (fair value decrease due to
harvest).7
Underlying Concepts
IFRS uses the terms book value, carrying value, and carrying amount interchangeably.
Bancroft makes the following entry to record the change in carrying value of the milking
cows.
Biological Assets (milking cows) (€493,800 − €460,000) 33,800
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
33,800
As a result of this entry, Bancroft’s statement of financial position reports Biological Assets
(milking cows) as a non-current asset at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). In

--- Page 714 ---
addition, the unrealized gains and losses are reported as “Other income and expense” on the
income statement. In subsequent periods at each reporting date, Bancroft continues to report
Biological Assets at net realizable value and records any related unrealized gains or losses in
income. Because there is a ready market for the biological assets (milking cows), valuation at
net realizable value provides more relevant information about these assets.
In addition to recording the change in the biological assets, Bancroft makes the following
summary entry to record the milk harvested for the month of January.
Inventory (milk)
36,000
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
36,000
The milk inventory is recorded at net realizable value at the time it is harvested and
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income is recognized in income. As with the biological
assets, net realizable value is considered the most relevant for purposes of valuation at
harvest. What happens to the milk inventory that Bancroft records upon harvesting the milk
from the cows? Assuming the milk harvested in January was sold to a local cheese maker for
€38,500, Bancroft records the sale as follows.
Cash
38,500
Cost of Goods Sold 36,000
Inventory (milk)
36,000
Sales Revenue
38,500
Once harvested, the net realizable value of the harvested milk becomes its cost. The milk is
accounted for similarly to other inventories held for sale in the normal course of business.
A final note: Some animals or plants may not be considered biological assets but would be
classified and accounted for as other types of assets (not at net realizable value). For
example, a pet shop may hold an inventory of dogs, purchased from breeders, that it then
sells. Because the pet shop is not breeding the dogs, these dogs are not considered biological
assets. As a result, the dogs are accounted for as inventory held for sale (at LCNRV).
Commodity Broker-Traders
Commodity broker-traders also generally measure their inventories at fair value less costs to
sell (net realizable value), with changes in net realizable value recognized in income in the
period of the change. Broker-traders buy or sell commodities (such as harvested corn, wheat,
precious metals, and heating oil) for others or on their own account. The primary purpose for
holding these inventories is to sell the commodities in the near term and generate a profit
from fluctuations in price. Thus, net realizable value is the most relevant measure in this
industry because it indicates the amount that the broker-trader will receive from this
inventory in the future.
Assessing whether a company is acting in the role of a broker-trader requires judgment.
Companies should consider the length of time they are likely to hold the inventory and the
extent of additional services related to the commodity. If there are significant additional
services, such as distribution, storage, or repackaging, the company is likely not acting as a
broker-dealer. Thus, measurement of the commodity inventory at net realizable value is not
appropriate. For example, Columbia Coffee Wholesalers buys coffee beans and resells the
commodity in the same condition after a short period of time. Accounting for the coffee

--- Page 715 ---
inventory at net realizable value appears appropriate. However, if Columbia expands the
business to roast the beans and repackage them for resale to local coffee shops, the coffee
inventory should be accounted for at LCNRV, similar to other inventory held for sale.8
Relative Standalone Sales Value
A special problem arises when a company buys a group of varying units in a single lump-
sum purchase, also called a basket purchase.
To illustrate, assume that Woodland Developers purchases land for $1 million that it will
subdivide into 400 lots. These lots are of different sizes and shapes but can be roughly sorted
into three groups graded A, B, and C. As Woodland sells the lots, it apportions the purchase
cost of $1 million among the lots sold and the lots remaining on hand.
Why would Woodland not simply divide the total cost of $1 million by 400 lots, to get a cost
of $2,500 for each lot? This approach would not recognize that the lots vary in size, shape,
and attractiveness. Therefore, to accurately value each unit, the common and most logical
practice is to allocate the total among the various units on the basis of their relative
standalone sales value.
Illustration 9.10 shows the allocation of relative standalone sales value for the Woodland
Developers example.
Lots
Number of
Lots
Sales Price
per Lot
Total Sales
Price
Relative Sales
Price
Total Cost
Cost
Allocated to
Lots
Cost
per Lot
A
100
$10,000 $1,000,000
100/250 $1,000,000
$ 400,000 $4,000
B
100
6,000
600,000
60/250
1,000,000
240,000
2,400
C
200
4,500
900,000
90/250
1,000,000
360,000
1,800
$2,500,000
$1,000,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.10 Allocation of Costs, Using Relative Standalone Sales
Value
Using the amounts given in the “Cost per Lot” column, Woodland can determine the cost of
lots sold and the gross profit as shown in Illustration 9.11.
Lots Number of Lots Sold Cost per Lot Cost of Lots Sold
Sales
Gross Profit
A
77
$4,000
$308,000 $ 770,000
$ 462,000
B
80
2,400
192,000
480,000
288,000
C
100
1,800
180,000
450,000
270,000
$680,000 $1,700,000 $1,020,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.11 Determination of Gross Profit, Using Relative Standalone
Sales Value
The ending inventory is therefore $320,000 ($1,000,000 − $680,000).
Woodland also can compute this inventory amount another way. The ratio of cost to selling
price for all the lots is $1 million divided by $2,500,000, or 40 percent. Accordingly, if the
total sales price of lots sold is, say $1,700,000, then the cost of the lots sold is 40 percent of

--- Page 716 ---
$1,700,000, or $680,000. The inventory of lots on hand is then $1 million less $680,000, or
$320,000.
The petroleum industry widely uses the relative standalone sales value method to value (at
cost) the many products and by-products obtained from a barrel of crude oil.
Purchase Commitments—A Special Problem
In many lines of business, a company’s survival and continued profitability depend on its
having a sufficient stock of merchandise to meet customer demand. Consequently, it is quite
common for a company to make purchase commitments, which are agreements to buy
inventory weeks, months, or even years in advance. Generally, the seller retains title to the
merchandise or materials covered in the purchase commitments. Indeed, the goods may
exist only as natural resources, such as unplanted seed (in the case of agricultural
commodities), or as work-in-process (in the case of a product).9
Usually, it is neither necessary nor proper for the buyer to make any entries to reflect
commitments for purchases of goods that the seller has not shipped. Ordinary orders, for
which the buyer and seller will determine prices at the time of shipment and which are
subject to cancellation, do not represent either an asset or a liability to the buyer.
Therefore, the buyer need not record such purchase commitments or report them in the
financial statements.
What happens, though, if a buyer enters into a formal, non-cancelable purchase contract?
Even then, the buyer recognizes no asset or liability at the date of inception because the
contract is “executory” in nature: Neither party has fulfilled its part of the contract.
However, if material, the buyer should disclose such contract details in a note to its financial
statements. Illustration 9.12 shows an example of a purchase commitment disclosure.
Note 1: Contracts for the purchase of raw materials in 2023 have been executed in the
amount of $600,000. The market price of such raw materials on December 31, 2022, is
$640,000.
ILLUSTRATION 9.12 Disclosure of Purchase Commitment
In the disclosure in Illustration 9.12, the contract price was less than the market price at the
statement of financial position date. If the contract price is greater than the market
price and the buyer expects that losses will occur when the purchase is made, the
buyer should recognize a liability and corresponding loss in the period during
which such declines in market prices take place (see Underlying Concepts).10
Underlying Concepts
Reporting the loss is conservative. However, reporting the decline in market price is
debatable because no asset is recorded. This area demonstrates the need for good
definitions of assets and liabilities.
To illustrate the accounting problem, assume that Apres Paper AG signed timber-cutting
contracts with Galling Land Ltd. to be executed in 2023 at a price of €10,000,000. Assume
further that the market price of the timber-cutting rights on December 31, 2022, dropped to
€7,000,000. Apres would make the following entry on December 31, 2022.

--- Page 717 ---
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
3,000,000
Purchase Commitment Liability (€10,000,000 − €7,000,000)
3,000,000
Apres reports this unrealized holding loss in the income statement under “Other income and
expense.” And because the contract is to be executed within the next fiscal year, Apres
reports the Purchase Commitment Liability (often referred to as a provision) in the current
liabilities section on the statement of financial position. When Apres cuts the timber at a cost
of €10 million, it would make the following entry.
Purchases (Inventory)
7,000,000
Purchase Commitment Liability 3,000,000
Cash
10,000,000
The result of the purchase commitment was that Apres paid €10 million for a contract worth
only €7 million. It recorded the loss in the previous period—when the price actually declined.
If Apres can partially or fully recover the contract price before it cuts the timber, it reduces
the Purchase Commitment Liability. In that case, it then reports in the period of the price
increase a resulting gain for the amount of the partial or full recovery. For example, assume
that Galling Land Ltd. permits Apres to reduce its commitment from €10,000,000 to
€9,000,000. The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Purchase Commitment Liability (€10,000,000 − €9,000,000) 1,000,000
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
1,000,000
If the market price at the time Apres cuts the timber is more than €2,000,000 below the
contract price, Apres will have to recognize an additional loss in the period of cutting and
record the purchase at the LCNRV.
Are purchasers at the mercy of market price declines? Not totally. Purchasers can protect
themselves against the possibility of market price declines of goods under contract by
hedging. Through hedging, the purchaser in the purchase commitment simultaneously
enters into a contract in which it agrees to sell in the future the same quantity of the same
(or similar) goods at a fixed price. Thus, the company holds a buy position in a purchase
commitment and a sell position in a futures contract in the same commodity. The purpose of
the hedge is to offset the price risk of the buy and sell positions. The company will be better
off under one contract by approximately (maybe exactly) the same amount by which it is
worse off under the other contract.
For example, Apres could have hedged its purchase commitment contract with a futures
contract for timber rights of the same amount. In that case, its loss of €3,000,000 on the
purchase commitment could have been offset by a €3,000,000 gain on the futures contract.11
Although it sounds relatively easy, accounting for purchase commitments is controversial.
Some argue that companies should report purchase commitments as assets and liabilities at
the time they sign the contract. Others believe that delaying the recognition to the delivery
date is more appropriate. Although the discussion in the Conceptual Framework does not
exclude the possibility of recording assets and liabilities for purchase commitments, it
contains no definitive conclusion about whether companies should record them. [9]
The Gross Profit Method of Estimating Inventory

--- Page 718 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
Companies take a physical inventory to verify the accuracy of the perpetual inventory records
or, if no records exist, to arrive at an inventory amount. Sometimes, however, taking a
physical inventory is impractical. In such cases, companies use substitute measures to
approximate inventory on hand.
One substitute method of verifying or determining the inventory amount is the gross profit
method (also called the gross margin method). Auditors widely use this method in
situations where they need only an estimate of the company’s inventory (e.g., interim
reports). Companies also use this method when fire or other catastrophe destroys either
inventory or inventory records. The gross profit method relies on three assumptions:
1. The beginning inventory plus purchases equal total goods to be accounted for.
2. Goods not sold must be on hand.
3. The sales, reduced to cost, deducted from the sum of the opening inventory plus
purchases, equal ending inventory.
To illustrate, assume that Cetus SE has a beginning inventory of €60,000 and purchases of
€200,000, both at cost. Sales at selling price amount to €280,000. The gross profit on selling
price is 30 percent. Cetus applies the gross profit method as shown in Illustration 9.13.
Beginning inventory (at cost)
€ 60,000
Purchases (at cost)
200,000
Goods available (at cost)
260,000
Sales (at selling price)
€280,000
Less: Gross profit (.30 x €280,000)
84,000
Sales (at cost)
196,000
Approximate inventory (at cost)
€ 64,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.13 Application of Gross Profit Method
The current period’s records contain all the information Cetus needs to compute inventory at
cost, except for the gross profit percentage. Cetus determines the gross profit percentage by
reviewing company policies or prior period records. In some cases, companies must adjust
this percentage if they consider prior periods unrepresentative of the current period.12
Computation of Gross Profit Percentage
In most situations, the gross profit percentage is stated as a percentage of selling price.
The previous illustration, for example, used a 30 percent gross profit on sales. Gross profit
on selling price is the common method for quoting the profit for several reasons. (1) Most
companies state goods on a retail basis, not a cost basis. (2) A profit quoted on selling price is
lower than one based on cost. This lower rate gives a favorable impression to the consumer.
(3) The gross profit based on selling price can never exceed 100 percent.13

--- Page 719 ---
In Illustration 9.13, the gross profit was a given. But how did Cetus derive that figure? To see
how to compute a gross profit percentage, assume that an article costs €15 and sells for €20,
a gross profit of €5. As shown in the computations in Illustration 9.14, this markup is ¼
or 25 percent of retail, and ⅓ or 33⅓ percent of cost.
=
= 25% at retail
=
= 33⅓% on cost
ILLUSTRATION 9.14 Computation of Gross Profit Percentage
Although companies normally compute the gross profit on the basis of selling price, you
should understand the basic relationship between markup on cost and markup on selling
price. For example, assume that a company marks up a given item by 25 percent on cost.
What, then, is the gross profit on selling price? To find the answer, assume that the item
sells for €1. In this case, the following formula applies.
Cost + Gross profit = Selling price
C + .25C = SP
(1 + .25)C = SP
1.25C = €1.00
C = €0.80
The gross profit equals €0.20 (€1.00 − €0.80). The rate of gross profit on selling price is
therefore 20 percent (€0.20/€1.00).
Conversely, assume that the gross profit on selling price is 20 percent. What is the markup
on cost? To find the answer, assume that the item sells for €1. Again, the same formula
holds:
Cost + Gross profit = Selling price
C + .20SP = SP
C = (1 − .20)SP
C = .80SP
C = .80(€1.00)
C = €0.80
As in the previous example, the markup equals €0.20 (€1.00 − €0.80). The markup on cost
is 25 percent (€0.20 ÷ €0.80).
Illustration 9.15 presents formulas that retailers use to express these relationships:
Markup
Retail
€5
€20
Markup
Cost
€5
€15

--- Page 720 ---
1. Gross Profit on Selling Price =
2. Percentage Markup on Cost =
ILLUSTRATION 9.15 Formulas Relating to Gross Profit
To understand how to use these formulas, consider their application in the calculations
shown in Illustration 9.16.
ILLUSTRATION 9.16 Application of Gross Profit Formulas
Because selling price exceeds cost, and with the gross profit amount the same for both,
gross profit on selling price will always be less than the related percentage based
on cost. Note that companies do not multiply sales by a cost-based markup percentage.
Instead, they must convert the gross profit percentage to a percentage based on selling price.
Evaluation of Gross Profit Method
What are the major disadvantages of the gross profit method? One disadvantage is that it
provides an estimate. As a result, companies must take a physical inventory to verify the
inventory. Second, the gross profit method uses past percentages in determining the
markup. Although the past often provides answers to the future, a current rate is more
appropriate. Note that whenever significant fluctuations occur, companies should adjust the
percentage as appropriate. Third, companies must be careful in applying a blanket gross
profit rate. Frequently, a store or department handles merchandise with widely varying
rates of gross profit. In these situations, the company may need to apply the gross profit
method by subsections, lines of merchandise, or a similar basis that classifies merchandise
according to their respective rates of gross profit. The gross profit method is normally
unacceptable for financial reporting purposes because it provides only an
estimate. IFRS requires a physical inventory as additional verification of the inventory
indicated in the records. Note that the gross profit method will follow closely the inventory
method used (FIFO or average-cost) because it relies on historical records.
Percentage Markup on Cost
100% + Percentage Markup on Cost
Gross Profit on Selling Price
100% − Percentage Markup on Cost

--- Page 721 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
I’ll Trade You
Now that we know how to record a decline in value below cost, you might wonder what
managers do with problem inventory that has been written down. Unfortunately, the
solution for many companies is either to (a) negotiate with liquidators to get the best
price for the inventory, which is typically only 10 to 40 percent of book value, or (b) even
worse, ignore it. As one manager remarked: “We’ll figure it out later. There are more
pressing matters to attend to right now.” However, without a good plan to deal with
problem inventory, other challenges arise, such as problem inventory taking up space
that could be used for newer, more profitable products; storage costs; and waste
(inventory that perishes or whose date has expired often simply gets thrown out).
Reducing wasted inventory is critical for cost control and profitability. So, what to do?
An increasingly popular approach to managing excess problematic inventory is corporate
barter—the exchange of goods and services for problem inventory on a non-cash basis
through the use of commercial trade credit. This is how it works. The company with the
problem inventory seeks a trading partner that could provide something of value in
exchange for the problem inventory. Media services, including TV and radio commercial
air time and print advertising space, have long been the barter instrument of choice.
The company with the problem inventory receives advertising and other services—
services that are especially valuable for companies with no or limited media budgets.
Logistics barter is also common, which includes services such as ocean or air freight,
less than truckload (LTL), full truck, intermodal, and drayage. All companies require
some form of logistics to do business, and logistics barter can be typically used by
companies whose annual sales revenue is as little as $50 million.
A liquidator may still be involved to sell the problem inventory, but the barter partner
usually receives three to four times the cash liquidation value. This is because the
liquidator sells the inventory under restrictions, such as limiting redistribution of the
assets to certain geographic areas or to certain accounts such as non-competitive
accounts or to inappropriate selling environments, such as discount or secondhand
outlets. The company that unloads the problem inventory now has a trade credit that
can be used to purchase raw materials, capital equipment, or professional services.
While a barter transaction cannot help a company avoid the accounting consequences of
an inventory impairment, it represents an innovative way to make the best of a bad
situation.
Source: Modified from Nicholas Isasi, “Achieving a Higher Value for Problematic Inventory via Corporate Barter,”
Accounting Today (October 21, 2015).
Retail Inventory Method
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.

--- Page 722 ---
Accounting for inventory in a retail operation presents several challenges. Retailers with
certain types of inventory may use the specific identification method to value their
inventories. Such an approach makes sense when a retailer holds significant individual
inventory units, such as automobiles, pianos, or fur coats. However, imagine attempting to
use such an approach at Carrefour (FRA), Debenhams (GBR), or Bloomingdale’s (USA)
—high-volume retailers and supermarkets that have many different types of merchandise. It
would be extremely difficult to determine the cost of each sale, to enter cost codes on the
tickets, to change the codes to reflect declines in value of the merchandise, to allocate costs
such as transportation, and so on.
An alternative is to compile the inventories at retail prices. For most retailers, an observable
pattern between cost and selling price exists. The retailer can then use a formula to convert
retail prices to cost. This method is called the retail inventory method. It requires that
the retailer keep a record of (1) the total cost and retail value of goods purchased,
(2) the total cost and retail value of the goods available for sale, and (3) the sales
for the period. Use of the retail inventory method is very common. For example,
Carrefour supermarkets uses the retail inventory method, as do Walmart (USA) and
Debenhams (GBR).
Here is how it works at a company like Debenhams. Beginning with the retail value of the
goods available for sale, Debenhams deducts the sales for the period. This calculation
determines an estimated inventory (goods on hand) at retail. It next computes the cost-to-
retail ratio for all goods. The formula for this computation is to divide the total goods
available for sale at cost by the total goods available at retail price. Finally, to obtain ending
inventory at cost, Debenhams applies the cost-to-retail ratio to the ending inventory valued
at retail. Illustration 9.17 shows the retail inventory method calculations for Debenhams
using assumed data.
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
£14,000 £ 20,000
Purchases
63,000
90,000
Goods available for sale
£77,000
110,000
Deduct: Sales
85,000
Ending inventory, at retail
£ 25,000
Ratio of cost to retail (£77,000 ÷ £110,000) =
70%
Ending inventory at cost (.70 x £25,000) = £17,500
ILLUSTRATION 9.17 Retail Inventory Method Calculations
There are different versions of the retail inventory method. These include the conventional
method (based on LCNRV) and the cost method. Regardless of which version a company
uses, tax authorities, various retail associations, and the accounting profession all sanction
use of the retail inventory method. One of its advantages is that a company like Debenhams
can approximate the inventory balance without a physical count. However, to avoid a
potential overstatement of the inventory, Debenhams makes periodic inventory counts. Such
counts are especially important in retail operations where loss due to shoplifting or breakage
is common.

--- Page 723 ---
The retail inventory method is particularly useful for any type of interim report because such
reports usually need a fairly quick and reliable measure of the inventory. Also, insurance
adjusters often use this method to estimate losses from fire, flood, or other type of casualty.
This method also acts as a control device because a company will have to explain any
discrepancies between the results of the retail method and a physical count at the end of the
year. Finally, the retail method expedites the physical inventory count at year-end. The
crew taking the physical inventory need record only the retail price of each item. The crew
does not need to look up each item’s invoice cost, thereby saving time and expense.
Retail-Method Concepts
The amounts shown in the “Retail” column of Illustration 9.17 represent the original retail
prices, assuming no price changes. In practice, though, retailers frequently mark up or mark
down the prices they charge buyers.
For retailers, the term markup means an additional markup of the original retail price. (In
another context, such as in the previous discussion of gross profit, we often think of markup
on the basis of cost.) Markup cancellations are decreases in prices of merchandise that
the retailer had marked up above the original retail price.
In a competitive market, retailers often need to use markdowns, which are decreases in the
original sales prices. Such cuts in sales prices may be necessary due to a decrease in the
general level of prices, special sales, soiled or damaged goods, overstocking, and market
competition. Markdowns are common in retailing these days. Markdown cancellations
occur when the markdowns are later offset by increases in the prices of goods that the
retailer had marked down—such as after a one-day sale. Neither a markup cancellation nor a
markdown cancellation can exceed the original markup or markdown.
To illustrate these concepts, assume that Designer Clothing Store recently purchased 100
dress shirts from Marroway Group. The cost for these shirts was €1,500, or €15 a shirt.
Designer Clothing established the selling price on these shirts at €30 a shirt. The shirts were
selling quickly, so the manager added a markup of €5 per shirt. This markup made the price
too high for customers, and sales slowed. The manager then reduced the price to €32. At this
point, we would say that the shirts at Designer Clothing have had a markup of €5 and a
markup cancellation of €3.
A month later, the manager marked down the remaining shirts to a sales price of €23. At this
point, an additional markup cancellation of €2 has taken place, and a €7 markdown has
occurred. If the manager later increases the price of the shirts to €24, a markdown
cancellation of €1 would occur.
Retail Inventory Method with Markups and Markdowns—Conventional
Method
Retailers use markup and markdown concepts in developing the proper inventory valuation
at the end of the accounting period. To obtain the appropriate inventory figures, companies
must give proper treatment to markups, markup cancellations, markdowns, and markdown
cancellations.
To illustrate the different possibilities, consider the data for In-Fusion SA shown in
Illustration 9.18. In-Fusion can calculate its ending inventory at cost under two
assumptions, A and B. (We’ll explain the reasons for the two later.)

--- Page 724 ---
Assumption A: Computes a cost ratio after markups (and markup cancellations) but
before markdowns.
Assumption B: Computes a cost ratio after both markups and markdowns (and
cancellations).
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
€ 500
€ 1,000
Purchases (net)
20,000
35,000
Markups
3,000
Markup cancellations
1,000
Markdowns
2,500
Markdown cancellations
2,000
Sales (net)
25,000
In-Fusion SA
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
€ 500
€ 1,000
Purchases (net)
20,000
35,000
Merchandise available for sale
20,500
36,000
Add: Markups
€3,000
Less: Markup cancellations
1,000
Net markups
 
2,000
20,500
38,000
(A)
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 53.9%
Deduct:
Markdowns
2,500
Less: Markdown cancellations
(2,000)
Net markdowns
500
€20,500
37,500
(B)
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 54.7%
Deduct: Sales (net)
25,000
Ending inventory, at retail
€12,500
ILLUSTRATION 9.18 Retail Inventory Method with Markups and Markdowns
The computations for In-Fusion are:
Ending Inventory at Retail × Cost Ratio = Value of Ending Inventory
Assumption A: €12,500 × .539 = €6,737.50
€20,500
€38,000
€20,500
€37,500

--- Page 725 ---
Assumption B: €12,500 × .547 = €6,837.50
The question becomes: Which assumption and which percentage should In-Fusion use to
compute the ending inventory valuation? The answer depends on which retail inventory
method In-Fusion chooses.
One approach uses only Assumption A (a cost ratio using markups but not
markdowns). It approximates the lower-of-average-cost-or-net realizable value.
We will refer to this approach as the conventional retail inventory method or the
LCNRV.
To understand why this method considers only the markups, not the markdowns, in the cost
percentage, you must understand how a retail business operates. A markup normally
indicates an increase in the sales value of the item. On the other hand, a markdown means a
decline in the utility of that item. Therefore, to approximate the LCNRV, we would consider
markdowns a current loss and so would not include them in calculating the cost-to-retail
ratio. Omitting the markdowns would make the cost-to-retail ratio lower, which leads to an
approximate LCNRV.
An example will make the distinction between the two methods clear. Assume In-Fusion
purchased two items for €5 apiece; the original sales price was €10 each. One item was
subsequently marked down to €2. Assuming no sales for the period, if markdowns are
considered in the cost-to-retail ratio (Assumption B—the cost method), we compute the
ending inventory as shown in Illustration 9.19.
Markdowns Included in Cost-to-Retail Ratio
Cost
Retail
Purchases
€10
€20
Deduct: Markdowns (€10 − €2)
8
Ending inventory, at retail
€12
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 83.3%
Ending inventory at cost (€12 × .833) = €10
ILLUSTRATION 9.19 Retail Inventory Method Including Markdowns—Cost
Method
This approach (the cost method) reflects an average cost of the two items of the
commodity without considering the loss on the one item. It values ending inventory at €10.
If markdowns are not considered in the cost-to-retail ratio (Assumption A—the
conventional retail method), we compute the ending inventory as shown in Illustration
9.20.
€10
€12

--- Page 726 ---
Markdowns Not Included in Cost-to-Retail Ratio
Cost
Retail
Purchases
€10
€20
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 50%
Deduct: Markdowns
8
Ending inventory, at retail
€12
Ending inventory at cost (€12 × .50) = €6
ILLUSTRATION 9.20 Retail Inventory Method Excluding Markdowns—
Conventional Method (LCNRV)
Under this approach (the conventional retail method, in which markdowns are not
considered), ending inventory would be €6. The inventory valuation of €6 reflects two
inventory items, one inventoried at €5 and the other at €1. It reflects the fact that In-Fusion
reduced the sales price from €10 to €2, and reduced the cost from €5 to €1.14
To approximate the LCNRV, In-Fusion must establish the cost-to-retail ratio. It does this
by dividing the cost of goods available for sale by the sum of the original retail price of these
goods plus the net markups. This calculation excludes markdowns and markdown
cancellations. Illustration 9.21 shows the basic format for the retail inventory method
using the LCNRV approach along with the In-Fusion information.
ILLUSTRATION 9.21 Comprehensive Conventional Retail Inventory Method
Format
€10
€20

--- Page 727 ---
Because an averaging effect occurs, an exact LCNRV inventory valuation is ordinarily not
obtained, but an adequate approximation can be achieved. In contrast, adding net markups
and deducting net markdowns yield approximate cost.
Special Items Relating to Retail Method
The retail inventory method becomes more complicated when we consider such items as
freight-in, purchase returns and allowances, and purchase discounts. In the retail method,
we treat such items as follows.
Freight costs are part of the purchase cost.
Purchase returns are ordinarily considered as a reduction of the price at both cost and
retail.
Purchase discounts and allowances usually are considered as a reduction of the
cost of purchases.
In short, the treatment for the items affecting the cost column of the retail inventory
approach follows the computation for cost of goods available for sale.15
Note also that sales returns and allowances are considered as proper adjustments to
gross sales. However, when sales are recorded gross, companies do not recognize sales
discounts. To adjust for the sales discount account in such a situation would provide an
ending inventory figure at retail that would be overvalued.
In addition, a number of special items require careful analysis:
Transfers-in from another department are reported in the same way as purchases from
an outside enterprise.
Normal shortages (breakage, damage, theft, shrinkage) should reduce the retail
column because these goods are no longer available for sale. Such costs are reflected in
the selling price because a certain amount of shortage is considered normal in a retail
enterprise. As a result, companies do not consider this amount in computing the cost-to-
retail percentage. Rather, to arrive at ending inventory at retail, they show normal
shortages as a deduction similar to sales.
Abnormal shortages, on the other hand, are deducted from both the cost and retail
columns and reported as a special inventory amount or as a loss. To do otherwise
distorts the cost-to-retail ratio and overstates ending inventory.
Employee discounts (given to employees to encourage loyalty and better
performance) are deducted from the retail column in the same way as sales. These
discounts should not be considered in the cost-to-retail percentage because they do not
reflect an overall change in the selling price.16
Illustration 9.22 shows some of these concepts. The company, Extreme Sport Apparel,
determines its inventory using the conventional retail inventory method.

--- Page 728 ---
ILLUSTRATION 9.22 Conventional Retail Inventory Method—Special Items
Included
Evaluation of Retail Inventory Method
Companies such as Carrefour (FRA), Marks and Spencer (GBR), and your local
department store use the retail inventory method of computing inventory for the following
reasons: (1) to permit the computation of net income without a physical count of inventory,
(2) as a control measure in determining inventory shortages, (3) in regulating quantities of
merchandise on hand, and (4) for insurance information.
One characteristic of the retail inventory method is that it has an averaging effect on
varying rates of gross profit. This can be problematic when companies apply the method
to an entire business, where rates of gross profit vary among departments. There is no
allowance for possible distortion of results because of such differences. Companies refine the
retail method under such conditions by computing inventory separately by departments, or
by classes of merchandise with similar gross profits. In addition, the reliability of this
method assumes that the distribution of items in inventory is similar to the “mix” in the total
goods available for sale.
Presentation and Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
Presentation of Inventories

--- Page 729 ---
Accounting standards require financial statement disclosure of the following items related to
inventories:
1. The accounting policies adopted in measuring inventories, including the cost formula
used (weighted-average, FIFO).
2. The total carrying amount of inventories and the carrying amount in classifications
(common classifications of inventories are merchandise, production supplies, raw
materials, work-in-process, and finished goods).
3. The carrying amount of inventories carried at fair value less costs to sell.
4. The amount of inventories recognized as an expense during the period (cost of goods
sold).
5. The amount of any write-down of inventories recognized as an expense in the period and
the amount of any reversal of write-downs recognized as a reduction of expense in the
period.
6. The circumstances or events that led to the reversal of a write-down of inventories.
7. The carrying amount of inventories pledged as security for liabilities, if any.
This information can be disclosed in the statement of financial position or in a separate
schedule in the notes. The relative mix of raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods
helps in assessing liquidity and in computing the stage of inventory completion. Significant
or unusual financing arrangements relating to inventories may require note disclosure.
Examples include transactions with related parties, product financing arrangements, firm
purchase commitments, and pledging of inventories as collateral. [10] For example,
Illustration 9.23 shows the disclosures from the annual report of Lectra SA (FRA).

--- Page 730 ---
ILLUSTRATION 9.23 Disclosure of Inventory Methods
If Lectra changes the method of pricing any of its inventory elements, it must report a
change in accounting principle. For example, if Lectra changes its method of accounting for
its finished goods from weighted-average to FIFO, it should separately report this change,
along with the effect on income, in the current and prior periods (as discussed in Chapter
22). Changes in accounting principle require an explanatory paragraph in the auditor’s report
describing the change in method.
As another example of inventory disclosure practices, Pernod Ricard (FRA) reported its
inventories in its annual report, as shown in Illustration 9.24 (note the “trade practice”
followed in classifying some long-cycle inventories among the current assets).

--- Page 731 ---
Pernod Ricard
Current assets
Inventories (Note 4.4)
€5,305
Note 4.4 Inventories
Inventories are measured at the lowest of either cost (acquisition cost and cost of
production, including indirect production overheads) or net realizable value. Net realizable
value is the selling price less the estimated costs of completion and sale of the inventories.
Most inventories are valued using the weighted average cost method. The cost of long-cycle
inventories is calculated using a single method which includes distilling and ageing
maturing costs. These inventories are classified in current assets, although a substantial
part remains in inventory for more than one year before being sold in order to undergo the
ageing process used for certain Wines and Spirits.
The breakdown of inventories and work-in-progress at the balance sheet date is as follows:
Movements in the year
In euro
millions
Beginning
of year
Change
in gross
value
Change in
impairment
Foreign
currency
gains and
losses
Other
movements
End of
year
Raw materials
132
(4)
—
(3)
(1)
124
Work-in-
progress
4,454
142
—
(103)
7
4,500
Goods in
inventory
476
(15)
—
(10)
0
451
Finished
products
286
(4)
—
(3)
(4)
275
GROSS VALUE
5,348
119
—
(119)
2
5,350
Raw materials
(10)
—
(1)
0
1
(10)
Work-in-
progress
(17)
—
5
0
0
(12)
Goods in
inventory
(16)
—
3
1
0
(12)
Finished
products
(11)
—
0
0
0
(11)
IMPAIRMENT
(54)
—
7
1
1
(45)
NET
INVENTORIES
5,294
119
7
(118)
3
5,305
Other movements are mostly due to foreign currency gains and losses. At year-end,
maturing inventories intended mainly for use in whisky and cognac production accounted
for 84% of work-in-progress. Pernod Ricard is not significantly dependent on its suppliers.

--- Page 732 ---
ILLUSTRATION 9.24 Disclosure of Trade Practice in Valuing Inventories
As indicated in the prior illustration, companies also disclose inventory revaluations and
valuation allowances to arrive at inventory recorded at net realizable value. Thus, for Pernod
Ricard, its inventories at cost (or net realizable value) at year-end are €5,305 million.
Analysis of Inventories
The amount of inventory that a company carries can have significant economic
consequences. As a result, companies must manage inventories. But, inventory management
is a double-edged sword. It requires constant attention. On the one hand, management wants
to stock a great variety and quantity of items. Doing so will provide customers with the
greatest selection. However, such an inventory policy may incur excessive carrying costs
(e.g., investment, storage, insurance, taxes, obsolescence, and damage). On the other hand,
low inventory levels lead to stockouts, lost sales, and disgruntled customers.
Using financial ratios helps companies to chart a middle course between these two dangers.
Common ratios used in the management and evaluation of inventory levels are inventory
turnover and a related measure, average days to sell the inventory.
Inventory Turnover
The inventory turnover measures the number of times on average a company sells the
inventory during the period. It measures the liquidity of the inventory. To compute inventory
turnover, divide the cost of goods sold by the average inventory on hand during the period.
Barring seasonal factors, analysts compute average inventory from beginning and ending
inventory balances. For example, in its 2019 annual report, Tate & Lyle plc (GBR) reported
a beginning inventory of £419 million, an ending inventory of £434 million, and cost of goods
sold of £1,621 million for the year. Illustration 9.25 shows the inventory turnover formula
and Tate & Lyle’s 2019 ratio computation.
Inventory Turnover =
=
= 3.80 times
ILLUSTRATION 9.25 Inventory Turnover
Average Days to Sell Inventory
A variant of the inventory turnover ratio is the average days to sell inventory. This
measure represents the average number of days’ sales for which a company has inventory on
hand. For example, the inventory turnover for Tate & Lyle of 3.80 times divided into 365 is
approximately 96 days.
There are typical levels of inventory in every industry. However, companies that keep their
inventory at lower levels with higher turnovers than those of their competitors, while still
satisfying customer needs, are generally the most successful.
Review and Practice
Cost of Goods Sold
Average Inventory
£1,621
(£419 + £434) ÷ 2

--- Page 733 ---
Key Terms Review
agricultural produce
average days to sell inventory
biological asset
conventional retail inventory method
cost-of-goods-sold method
cost-to-retail ratio
gross profit method
gross profit percentage
hedging
inventory turnover
loss method
lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV)
lump-sum (basket) purchase
markdown
markdown cancellations
markup
markup cancellations
net realizable value (NRV)
onerous (contract) (n)
purchase commitments
relative standalone sales value
retail inventory method
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
If inventory declines in value below its original cost, for whatever reason, a company should
write down the inventory to reflect this loss. The general rule is to abandon the historical
cost principle when the future utility (revenue-producing ability) of the asset drops below its
original cost.
2 Identify other inventory valuation issues.
Companies value inventory at net realizable value when cost is difficult to determine, the
items are readily marketable at quoted market prices, and units of product are
interchangeable. Three common situations in which net realizable value is the general rule
for valuing inventory are (1) agricultural inventory (including biological assets and

--- Page 734 ---
agricultural produce), (2) minerals and mineral products, and (3) commodities held by
broker-traders.
When a company purchases a group of varying units at a single lump-sum price—a so-called
basket purchase—the company may allocate the total purchase price to the individual items
on the basis of relative standalone sales value.
Accounting for purchase commitments is controversial. Some argue that companies
should report purchase commitment contracts as assets and liabilities at the time the
contract is signed. Others believe that recognition at the delivery date is most appropriate. If
a company has a firm purchase commitment and the price falls below the contract price, a
loss should be recognized. IFRS refers to this situation as an onerous contract.
3 Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
Companies follow these steps to determine ending inventory by the gross profit method. (1)
Compute the gross profit percentage on selling price. (2) Compute gross profit by multiplying
net sales by the gross profit percentage. (3) Compute cost of goods sold by subtracting gross
profit from net sales. (4) Compute ending inventory by subtracting cost of goods sold from
total goods available for sale.
4 Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.
Companies follow these steps to determine ending inventory by the retail method. (1) To
estimate inventory at retail, deduct the sales for the period from the retail value of the goods
available for sale. (2) To find the cost-to-retail ratio for all goods passing through a
department or firm, divide the total goods available for sale at cost by the total goods
available at retail. (3) Convert the inventory valued at retail to approximate cost by applying
the cost-to-retail ratio.
5 Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
IFRS inventory disclosure requirements are shown with the examples in Illustrations 9.23
and 9.24. Accounting standards also require the consistent application of costing methods
from one period to another. Common ratios used in the management and evaluation of
inventory levels are inventory turnover and average days to sell the inventory.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions,
and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Norwood Company makes miniature circuit boards that are components of wireless
phones and personal organizers. The company has experienced strong growth, and you are
especially interested in how well Norwood is managing its inventory balances. You have
collected the following information for the current year.

--- Page 735 ---
Inventory at the beginning of year
$ 1,026,000
Inventory at the end of year, before any adjustments
1,007,000
Total cost of goods sold, before any adjustments
11,776,000
The company values inventory at lower-of-cost (using FIFO cost flow assumption)-or-net
realizable value and uses the cost-of-goods-sold method.
Instructions
a. Compute Norwood’s inventory turnover before any adjustment.
b. Recompute the inventory turnover after adjusting Norwood’s inventory information
for the following items.
1. During the year, Norwood recorded sales and costs of goods sold on $22,000 of
units shipped to various wholesalers on consignment. At year-end, none of these
units have been sold by wholesalers.
2. Shipping contracts changed 2 months ago from f.o.b. shipping point to f.o.b.
destination point. At the end of the year, $25,000 of products are en route to
China and will not arrive until after financial statements are released. Current
inventory balances do not reflect this change in policy.
3. At the end of the year, Norwood determined that a certain section of inventory
with an historical cost of $112,000 has a net realizable value of $100,800. There is
no need to make a lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value adjustment to other
inventory.
Solution
a. 
= 11.6 times
b. Adjustments to ending inventory
Item
Adjustment
to Ending
Inventory
Explanation
1. Consigned
goods
$22,000
Norwood should count the goods it has consigned in other
stores.
2. Goods in
transit
$25,000
Goods officially change hands at the point of destination.
Norwood should still show these goods in inventory (not
cost of goods sold), until they reach the destination.
3. Lower-of-
cost-or-net
realizable
value
$(11,200)
($112,000 − $100,800). The correct valuation is $100,800
since the net realizable value of $100,800 is less than the
original cost.
Adjusted inventory turnover =
$11,776,000
($1,026,000 + $1,007,000) ÷ 2
$11,740,200a
($1,026,000 + $1,042,800)b ÷ 2

--- Page 736 ---
aCost of goods sold: $11,776,000 − $22,000 − $25,000 + $11,200 = $11,740,200
bEnding inventory: $1,007,000 + $22,000 + $25,000 − $11,200 = $1,042,800
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Questions
1. Where there is evidence that the utility of inventory goods, as part of their disposal in the
ordinary course of business, will be less than cost, what is the proper accounting treatment?
2. Why are inventories valued at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV)? What
are the arguments against the use of the LCNRV method of valuing inventories?
3. What approaches may be employed in applying the LCNRV procedure? Which approach is
normally used and why?
4. In some instances, accounting principles require a departure from valuing inventories at
cost alone. Determine the proper unit inventory price in the following cases.
Cases
1
2
3
4
5
Cost
€15.90 €16.10 €15.90 €15.90 €15.90
Sales value
14.80
19.20
15.20
10.40
17.80
Estimated cost to complete
1.50
1.90
1.65
.80
1.00
Estimated cost to sell
.50
.70
.55
.40
.60
5. What method(s) might be used in the accounts to record a loss due to a price decline in
the inventories? Discuss.
6. What exceptions might call for inventory valuation at net realizable value?
7. Briefly describe the valuation of (a) biological assets and (b) agricultural produce.
8. Under what circumstances is relative standalone sales value an appropriate basis for
determining the price assigned to inventory?
9. At December 31, 2022, Ashley plc has outstanding purchase commitments for purchase of
150,000 gallons, at £6.20 per gallon, of a raw material to be used in its manufacturing
process. The company prices its raw material inventory at cost or net realizable value,
whichever is lower. Assuming that the market price as of December 31, 2022, is £5.90, how
would you treat this situation in the accounts?
10. What are the major uses of the gross profit method?
11. Distinguish between gross profit as a percentage of cost and gross profit as a percentage
of sales price. Convert the following gross profit percentages based on cost to gross profit
percentages based on sales price: 25% and 331⁄3%. Convert the following gross profit
percentages based on sales price to gross profit percentages based on cost: 331⁄3% and 60%.

--- Page 737 ---
12. With annual net sales of $5 million, Adriana Co. maintains a markup of 25% based on
cost. Adriana’s expenses average 15% of net sales. What is Adriana’s gross profit and net
profit in dollars?
13. A fire destroys all of the merchandise of Assante Company on February 10, 2022. The
following is information compiled up to the date of the fire.
Inventory, January 1, 2022
$ 400,000
Sales to February 10, 2022
1,950,000
Purchases to February 10, 2022
1,140,000
Freight-in to February 10, 2022
60,000
Rate of gross profit on selling price
40%
What is the approximate inventory on February 10, 2022?
14. What conditions must exist for the retail inventory method to provide valid results?
15. The conventional retail inventory method yields results that are essentially the same as
those yielded by the LCNRV method. Explain. Prepare an illustration of how the retail
inventory method reduces inventory to net realizable value.
16.
a. Determine the ending inventory under the conventional retail method for the furniture
department of Mayron Department Stores from the following data (amounts in
thousands). (Round to nearest percent.)
Cost
Retail
Inventory, Jan. 1 ¥ 149,000 ¥ 283,500
Purchases
1,400,000 2,160,000
Freight-in
70,000
Markups, net
92,000
Markdowns, net
48,000
Sales
2,175,000
b. If the results of a physical inventory indicated an inventory at retail of ¥295,000, what
inferences would you draw?
17. Tesco (GBR) reported inventory in its statement of financial position as follows:
Inventories £2,430,000,000
What additional disclosures might be necessary to present the inventory fairly?
18. Of what significance is inventory turnover to a retail store?
Brief Exercises
BE9.1 (LO 1) Presented below is information related to Rembrandt Inc.’s inventory.
(per unit)
Skis
Boots
Parkas
Historical cost
$190.00 $106.00 $53.00

--- Page 738 ---
Selling price
212.00
145.00
73.75
Cost to sell
19.00
8.00
2.50
Cost to complete
32.00
29.00
21.25
Determine the following: (a) the net realizable value for each item, and (b) the carrying value
of each item under LCNRV.
BE9.2 (LO 1) Floyd SE has the following four items in its ending inventory.
Item
Cost
Net Realizable Value (NRV)
Jokers
€2,000
€2,100
Penguins
5,000
4,950
Riddlers
4,400
4,625
Scarecrows
3,200
3,830
Determine (a) the LCNRV for each item, and (b) the amount of write-down, if any, using (1)
an item-by-item LCNRV evaluation and (2) a total-group LCNRV evaluation.
BE9.3 (LO 1) Kumar SA uses a perpetual inventory system. At January 1, 2022, inventory
was R$214,000,000 at both cost and net realizable value. At December 31, 2022, the
inventory was R$286,000,000 at cost and R$265,000,000 at net realizable value. Prepare the
necessary December 31 entry under (a) the cost-of-goods-sold method and (b) the loss
method.
BE9.4 (LO 2) Keyser’s Fleece owns a herd of sheep. Keyser shears the sheep on a
semiannual basis and then sells the harvested wool into the specialty knitting market. Keyser
has the following information related to the shearing sheep at January 1, 2022, and during
the first 6 months of 2022.
Shearing sheep
Carrying value (equal to net realizable value), January 1, 2022 €74,000
Change in fair value due to growth and price changes
4,700
Change in fair value due to harvest
(575)
Wool harvested during the first 6 months (at NRV)
9,000
Prepare the journal entry (or entries) for Keyser’s biological asset (shearing sheep) for the
first 6 months of 2022.
BE9.5 (LO 2) Refer to the data in BE9.4 for Keyser’s Fleece. Prepare the journal entries for
(a) the wool harvested in the first 6 months of 2022, and (b) when the wool harvested is sold
for €10,500 in July 2022.
BE9.6 (LO 2) Benke Ltd. buys 1,000 computer game CDs from a distributor who is
discontinuing those games. The purchase price for the lot is ¥8,000. Benke will group the
CDs into three price categories for resale, as indicated below (yen in thousands).
Group No. of CDs Price per CD
1
100
¥ 5
2
800
10
3
100
15

--- Page 739 ---
Determine the cost per CD for each group, using the relative standalone sales value method.
BE9.7 (LO 2) Kemper Company signed a long-term, non-cancelable purchase commitment
with a major supplier to purchase raw materials in 2023 at a cost of $1,000,000. At
December 31, 2022, the raw materials to be purchased have a fair value of $950,000. Prepare
any necessary December 31 entry.
BE9.8 (LO 2) Use the information for Kemper Company from BE9.7. In 2023, Kemper paid
$1,000,000 to obtain the raw materials which were worth $950,000. Prepare the entry to
record the purchase.
BE9.9 (LO 3) Fosbre NV’s April 30 inventory was destroyed by fire. January 1 inventory was
€150,000, and purchases for January through April totaled €500,000. Sales for the same
period were €700,000. Fosbre’s normal gross profit percentage is 35% on sales. Using the
gross profit method, estimate Fosbre’s April 30 inventory that was destroyed by fire.
BE9.10 (LO 4) Boyne Inc. had beginning inventory of $12,000 at cost and $20,000 at retail.
Net purchases were $120,000 at cost and $170,000 at retail. Net markups were $10,000; net
markdowns were $7,000; and sales were $147,000. Compute ending inventory at cost using
the conventional retail method.
BE9.11 (LO 5) Recently, Inditex (ESP) reported ending inventory of €1,581.297
(€1,297.009 the previous year). Cost of sales were €6,486.825 and net sales were €15,946.143
(all amounts in millions). Compute Inditex’s inventory turnover and average days to sell
inventory.
Exercises
E9.1 (LO 1) (LCNRV) The inventory of Oheto Company on December 31, 2022, consists of
the following items.
Part No.
Quantity
Cost per Unit
Net Realizable Value per Unit
110
600
$95
$100
111
1,000
60
52
112
500
80
76
113
200
170
180
120
400
205
208
121a
1,600
16
1
122
300
240
235
aPart No. 121 is obsolete and has a realizable value of $1 each as scrap.
Instructions
a. Determine the inventory as of December 31, 2022, by the LCNRV method, applying this
method to each item.
b. Determine the inventory by the LCNRV method, applying the method to the total of the
inventory.
E9.2 (LO 1) (LCNRV) Riegel Company uses the LCNRV method, on an individual-item
basis, in pricing its inventory items. The inventory at December 31, 2022, consists of

--- Page 740 ---
products D, E, F, G, H, and I. Relevant per-unit data for these products appear below.
Item D Item E Item F Item G Item H Item I
Estimated selling price
€120
€110
€95
€90
€110
€90
Cost
75
80
80
80
50
36
Cost to complete
30
30
25
35
30
30
Selling costs
10
18
10
20
10
20
Instructions
Using the LCNRV rule, determine the proper unit value for statement of financial position
reporting purposes at December 31, 2022, for each of the inventory items above.
E9.3 (LO 1) (LCNRV) Sedato Company follows the practice of pricing its inventory at
LCNRV, on an individual-item basis.
Item No. Quantity Cost per Unit Estimated Selling Price Cost to Complete and Sell
1320
1,200
$3.20
$4.50
$1.60
1333
900
2.70
3.40
1.00
1426
800
4.50
5.00
1.40
1437
1,000
3.60
3.20
1.35
1510
700
2.25
3.25
1.40
1522
500
3.00
3.90
0.80
1573
3,000
1.80
2.50
1.20
1626
1,000
4.70
6.00
1.50
Instructions
Using the information above, determine the amount of Sedato Company inventory.
E9.4 (LO 1) (LCNRV—Journal Entries) Dover plc began operations in 2022 and
determined its ending inventory at cost and at NRV at December 31, 2022, and December 31,
2023. This information is presented below.
Cost
Net Realizable Value
12/31/22 £346,000
£322,000
12/31/23
410,000
390,000
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries required at December 31, 2022, and December 31, 2023,
assuming inventory is recorded at LCNRV and a perpetual inventory system using the
cost-of-goods-sold method.
b. Prepare journal entries required at December 31, 2022, and December 31, 2023,
assuming inventory is recorded at cost with a perpetual system. Use the loss method to
record any LCNRV.
c. Which of the two methods above provides the higher net income in each year?

--- Page 741 ---
E9.5 (LO 1) (LCNRV—Valuation Account) Presented below is information related to
Knight Enterprises.
Jan. 31 Feb. 28 Mar. 31 Apr. 30
Inventory at cost
$15,000 $15,100 $17,000 $14,000
Inventory at NRV
14,500
12,600
15,600
13,300
Purchases for the month
17,000 24,000
26,500
Sales for the month
29,000 35,000 40,000
Instructions
a. From the information, prepare (as far as the data permit) monthly income statements in
columnar form for February, March, and April. The inventory is to be shown in the
statement at cost; the gain or loss due to NRV market fluctuations is to be shown
separately (using a valuation account).
b. Prepare the journal entry required to establish the valuation account at January 31 and
entries to adjust it monthly thereafter.
E9.6 (LO 1) (LCNRV—Error Effect) LaGreca SA uses the LCNRV method, on an
individual-item basis, in pricing its inventory items. The inventory at December 31, 2022,
includes product X. Relevant per-unit data for product X are as follows.
Estimated selling price
€50
Cost
40
Estimated selling expenses
14
There are 1,000 units of product X on hand at December 31, 2022. Product X is incorrectly
valued at €38 per unit for reporting purposes. All 1,000 units are sold in 2023.
Instructions
Compute the effect of this error on net income for 2022 and the effect on net income for
2023, and indicate the direction of the misstatement for each year.
E9.7 (LO 2) (Valuation at Net Realizable Value) Matsumura Dairy began operations
on April 1, 2022, with the purchase of 200 milking cows for ¥6,700,000. It has completed the
first month of operations and has the following information for its milking cows at the end
of April 2022 (yen in thousands).
Milking cows
Change in fair value due to growth and price changes*
¥(200,000)
Decrease in fair value due to harvest
(12,000)
Milk harvested during April 2022 (at net realizable value)
72,000
*Due to a very high rate of calving in the past month, there is a glut of milking cows on the
market.
Instructions

--- Page 742 ---
a. Prepare the journal entries for Matsumura’s biological asset (milking cows) for the
month of April 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry for the milk harvested by Matsumura during April 2022.
c. Matsumura sells the milk harvested in April on the local milk exchange and receives
¥74,000. Prepare the summary journal entry to record the sale of the milk.
E9.8 (LO 2) (Valuation at Net Realizable Value) Mt. Horeb Alpaca Co. has a herd of
150 alpaca. The alpaca are sheared once a quarter to harvest valuable wool that is used in
designer sweaters. Mt. Horeb has the following information related to the alpaca herd at July
1, 2022, and during the first quarter of the fiscal year.
Alpaca
Carrying value (equal to net realizable value), July 1, 2022
$120,000
Change in fair value due to growth and price changes
7,700
Decrease in fair value due to harvest
(975)
Alpaca wool harvested during the first quarter (at net realizable value)
13,000
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries for Mt. Horeb’s biological asset (Alpaca herd) for the first
quarter.
b. Prepare the journal entries for the Alpaca wool harvested in the first quarter.
c. Prepare the journal entry when the Alpaca wool is sold for $14,500.
d. Briefly discuss the impact on income of the following events related to the alpaca
biological asset: (1) a female alpaca gives birth to a baby alpaca, and (2) an older alpaca
can only be sheared once every other quarter due to irritation caused by repeated
shearing over its life.
E9.9 (LO 2) (Relative Standalone Sales Value Method) Larsen Realty Ltd. purchased a
tract of unimproved land for £55,000. This land was improved and subdivided into building
lots at an additional cost of £30,000. These building lots were all of the same size. However,
owing to differences in location, the lots were offered for sale at different prices as follows.
Group No. of Lots Price per Lot
1
9
£3,000
2
15
4,000
3
19
2,000
Operating expenses for the year allocated to this project total £18,200. Lots unsold at the
year-end were as follows.
Group 1 5 lots
Group 2 7 lots
Group 3 2 lots
Instructions

--- Page 743 ---
At the end of the fiscal year, Larsen Realty instructs you to arrive at the net income realized
on this operation to date.
E9.10 (LO 2) (Relative Standalone Sales Value Method) During 2022, Crawford
Furniture purchases a carload of wicker chairs. The manufacturer sells the chairs to
Crawford for a lump sum of £60,000 because it is discontinuing manufacturing operations
and wishes to dispose of its entire stock. Three types of chairs are included in the carload.
The three types and the estimated selling price for each are listed below.
Type
No. of Chairs Estimated Selling Price Each
Lounge chairs
400
£90
Armchairs
300
80
Straight chairs
800
50
During 2022, Crawford sells 200 lounge chairs, 100 armchairs, and 120 straight chairs.
Instructions
What is the amount of gross profit realized during 2022? What is the amount of inventory of
unsold straight chairs on December 31, 2022?
E9.11 (LO 2) (Purchase Commitments) Prater Company has had difficulty obtaining key
raw materials for its manufacturing process. The company therefore signed a long-term, non-
cancelable purchase commitment with its largest supplier of this raw material on November
30, 2022, at an agreed price of $400,000. At December 31, 2022, the raw material had
declined in price to $375,000.
Instructions
What entry would you make on December 31, 2022, to recognize these facts?
E9.12 (LO 2) (Purchase Commitments) At December 31, 2022, Volkan AG has
outstanding non-cancelable purchase commitments for 40,000 gallons, at €3.00 per gallon,
of raw material to be used in its manufacturing process. The company prices its raw material
inventory at lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value.
Instructions
a. Assuming that the market price as of December 31, 2022, is €3.30, how would this
matter be treated in the accounts and statements? Explain.
b. Assuming that the market price as of December 31, 2022, is €2.70 instead of €3.30, how
would you treat this situation in the accounts and statements?
c. Give the entry in January 2023, when the 40,000-gallon shipment is received, assuming
that the situation given in (b) above existed at December 31, 2022, and that the market
price in January 2023 is €2.70 per gallon. Give an explanation of your treatment.
E9.13 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Each of the following gross profit percentages is
expressed in terms of cost.
1. 20%.
2. 25%.

--- Page 744 ---
3. 33⅓%.
4. 50%.
Instructions
Indicate the gross profit percentage in terms of sales for each of the above.
E9.14 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Astaire ASA uses the gross profit method to
estimate inventory for monthly reporting purposes. Presented below is information for the
month of May.
Inventory, May 1
€ 160,000
Purchases (gross)
640,000
Freight-in
30,000
Sales
1,000,000
Sales returns
70,000
Purchase discounts
12,000
Instructions
a. Compute the estimated inventory at May 31, assuming that the gross profit is 25% of
sales.
b. Compute the estimated inventory at May 31, assuming that the gross profit is 25% of
cost.
E9.15 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Zidek Corp. requires an estimate of the cost of goods
lost by fire on March 9. Merchandise on hand on January 1 was $38,000. Purchases since
January 1 were $92,000; freight-in, $3,400; purchase returns and allowances, $2,400. Sales
are made at 33⅓% above cost and totaled $120,000 to March 9. Goods costing $10,900 were
left undamaged by the fire; remaining goods were destroyed.
Instructions
a. Compute the cost of goods destroyed.
b. Compute the cost of goods destroyed, assuming that the gross profit is 33⅓% of sales.
E9.16 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Castlevania SA lost most of its inventory in a fire in
December just before the year-end physical inventory was taken. The company’s books
disclosed the following.
Beginning inventory
R$170,000 Sales
R$650,000
Purchases for the year
450,000 Sales returns
24,000
Purchase returns
30,000 Rate of gross margin on net sales
30%
Merchandise with a selling price of R$21,000 remained undamaged after the fire. Damaged
merchandise with an original selling price of R$15,000 had a net realizable value of R$5,300.
Instructions

--- Page 745 ---
Compute the amount of the loss as a result of the fire, assuming that the company had no
insurance coverage.
E9.17 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Yao Ming of Rocket Ltd. calls you on July 16 and
asks you to prepare a claim for insurance as a result of a theft that took place the night
before. You suggest that an inventory be taken immediately. The following data are available
(amounts in thousands).
Inventory, July 1
¥ 38,000
Purchases—goods placed in stock July 1–15
90,000
Sales—goods delivered to customers (gross)
116,000
Sales returns—goods returned to stock
4,000
Your client reports that the goods on hand on July 16 cost ¥30,500, but you determine that
this figure includes goods of ¥6,000 received on a consignment basis. Your past records show
that sales are made at approximately 25% over cost. Rocket’s insurance covers only goods
owned.
Instructions
Compute the claim against the insurance company.
E9.18 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Sliver Lumber Company handles three principal
lines of merchandise with these varying rates of gross profit on cost.
Lumber
25%
Millwork 30%
Hardware 40%
On August 18, a fire destroyed the office, lumber shed, and a considerable portion of the
lumber stacked in the yard. To file a report of loss for insurance purposes, the company must
know what the inventories were immediately preceding the fire. No detail or perpetual
inventory records of any kind were maintained. The only pertinent information you are able
to obtain are the following facts from the general ledger, which was kept in a fireproof vault
and escaped destruction.
Lumber
Millwork Hardware
Inventory, Jan. 1, 2022
$ 250,000 $ 90,000 $ 45,000
Purchases to Aug. 18, 2022 1,500,000
375,000
160,000
Sales to Aug. 18, 2022
2,050,000
533,000
245,000
Instructions
Submit your estimate of the inventory amounts immediately preceding the fire.
E9.19 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Presented below is information related to Jerrold
Ltd. for the current year.
Beginning inventory
£ 600,000
Purchases
1,500,000
Total goods available for sale
£2,100,000

--- Page 746 ---
Sales
2,300,000
Instructions
Compute the ending inventory, assuming that (a) gross profit is 40% of sales, (b) gross profit
is 60% of cost, (c) gross profit is 35% of sales, and (d) gross profit is 25% of cost.
E9.20 (LO 4) (Retail Inventory Method) Presented below is information related to
Luzon SA.
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory R$ 58,000 R$100,000
Purchases (net)
122,000
200,000
Net markups
20,000
Net markdowns
30,000
Sales
186,000
Instructions
a. Compute the ending inventory at retail.
b. Compute a cost-to-retail percentage (round to two decimals) under the following
conditions.
1. Excluding both markups and markdowns.
2. Excluding markups but including markdowns.
3. Excluding markdowns but including markups.
4. Including both markdowns and markups.
c. Which of the methods in (b) above (1, 2, 3, or 4) does the following?
1. Provides the most conservative estimate of ending inventory.
2. Provides an approximation of LCNRV.
3. Is used in the conventional retail method.
d. Compute ending inventory at LCNRV (round to nearest dollar).
e. Compute cost of goods sold based on (d).
f. Compute gross margin based on (d).
E9.21 (LO 4) (Retail Inventory Method) Presented below is information related to
Kuchinsky Company.
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
€ 200,000 € 280,000
Purchases
1,425,000
2,140,000
Markups
95,000
Markup cancellations
15,000
Markdowns
35,000

--- Page 747 ---
Markdown cancellations
5,000
Sales
2,250,000
Instructions
Compute the inventory by the conventional retail inventory method.
E9.22 (LO 4) (Retail Inventory Method) The records of Mandy’s Boutique report the
following data for the month of April.
Sales
£95,000 Purchases (at cost)
£55,000
Sales returns
2,000 Purchases (at sales price)
88,000
Markups
10,000 Purchase returns (at cost)
2,000
Markup cancellations
1,500 Purchase returns (at sales price)
3,000
Markdowns
9,300 Beginning inventory (at cost)
30,000
Markdown cancellations
2,800 Beginning inventory (at sales price)
46,500
Freight on purchases
2,400
Instructions
Compute the ending inventory by the conventional retail inventory method.
E9.23 (LO 5) (Analysis of Inventories) The financial statements of AB InBev’s (BEL)
2018 annual report disclosed the following information.
(in millions) 31 December 2018 31 December 2017
Inventories
$4,234
$4,119
Fiscal Year
2018
2017
Sales
$54,619
$56,444
Cost of sales
20,359
21,386
Net income
5,691
9,183
Instructions
Compute AB InBev’s (a) inventory turnover and (b) average days to sell inventory for 2018.
Problems
P9.1 (LO 1) (LCNRV) Remmers SE manufactures desks. Most of the company’s desks are
standard models and are sold on the basis of catalog prices. At December 31, 2022, the
following finished desks appear in the company’s inventory.
Finished Desks
A
B
C
D
2022 catalog selling price
€450 €480 €900 €1,050
FIFO cost per inventory list 12/31/22
470
450
830
960
Estimated cost to complete and sell
50
110
260
200
2023 catalog selling price
500
540
900
1,200

--- Page 748 ---
The 2022 catalog was in effect through November 2022, and the 2023 catalog is effective as
of December 1, 2022. All catalog prices are net of the usual discounts.
Instructions
At what amount should each of the four desks appear in the company’s December 31, 2022,
inventory, assuming that the company has adopted a lower-of-FIFO-cost-or-net realizable
value approach for valuation of inventories on an individual-item basis?
P9.2 (LO 1) 
 (LCNRV) Garcia Home Improvement plc installs replacement
siding, windows, and louvered glass doors for single-family homes and condominium
complexes. The company is in the process of preparing its annual financial statements for
the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022. Jim Alcide, controller for Garcia, has gathered the
following data concerning inventory.
At May 31, 2022, the balance in Garcia’s Raw Materials Inventory account was £408,000,
and Allowance to Reduce Inventory to NRV had a credit balance of £27,500. Alcide
summarized the relevant inventory cost and market data at May 31, 2022, in the schedule
below.
Alcide assigned Patricia Devereaux, an intern from a local college, the task of calculating the
amount that should appear on Garcia’s May 31, 2022, financial statements for inventory
under the LCNRV rule as applied to each item in inventory. Devereaux expressed concern
over departing from the historical cost principle.
Cost
Sales Price Net Realizable Value
Aluminum siding
£ 70,000
£ 64,000
£ 56,000
Cedar shake siding
86,000
94,000
84,800
Louvered glass doors
112,000
186,400
168,300
Thermal windows
140,000
154,800
140,000
Total
£408,000
£499,200
£449,100
Instructions
a. 
1. Determine the proper balance in Allowance to Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable
Value at May 31, 2022.
2. For the fiscal year ended May 31, 2022, determine the amount of the gain or loss
that would be recorded (using the loss method) due to the change in Allowance to
Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable Value.
b. Explain the rationale for the use of the LCNRV rule as it applies to inventories.
P9.3 (LO 1) (LCNRV—Cost-of-Goods-Sold and Loss) Malone Company determined its
ending inventory at cost and at LCNRV at December 31, 2022, December 31, 2023, and
December 31, 2024, as shown below.
Cost
LCNRV
12/31/22 $650,000 $650,000
12/31/23
780,000
712,000
12/31/24
905,000
830,000

--- Page 749 ---
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries required at December 31, 2023, and at December 31, 2024,
assuming that a perpetual inventory system and the cost-of-goods-sold method of
adjusting to LCNRV are used.
b. Prepare the journal entries required at December 31, 2023, and at December 31, 2024,
assuming that a perpetual inventory is recorded at cost and reduced to LCNRV using the
loss method.
P9.4 (LO 2) (Valuation at Net Realizable Value) Finn Berge realized his lifelong dream
of becoming a vineyard owner when he was able to purchase the Hillside Vineyard at an
estate auction in August 2022 for €750,000. Finn retained the Hillside name for his new
business. The purchase was risky because the growing season was coming to an end, the
grapes had to be harvested in the next several weeks, and Finn had limited experience in
carrying off a grape harvest.
At the end of the first quarter of operations, Finn felt pretty good about his early results. The
first harvest was a success; 300 bushels of grapes were harvested with a value of €30,000
(based on current local commodity prices at the time of harvest). And, given the strong yield
from area vineyards during the season, the net realizable value of Finn’s vineyard had
increased by €15,000 at the end of the quarter. After storing the grapes for a short period of
time, Finn was able to sell the entire harvest for €35,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries for the Hillside biological asset (grape vines) for the first
quarter of operations (the beginning carrying and net realizable value is €750,000).
b. Prepare the journal entry for the grapes harvested during the first quarter.
c. Prepare the journal entry to record the sale of the grapes harvested in the first quarter.
d. Determine the total effect on income for the quarter related to the Hillside biological
asset and agricultural produce.
e. Looking to the next growing season, Finn is doing some forecasting, based on the
following two developments: (1) demand is expected to increase for the type of grapes
his vineyard produces and (2) there are new producing vineyards coming on line that
will increase the supply of similar grapevines in the market. Briefly discuss how these
developments are likely to affect the value of Hillside’s biological assets and agricultural
produce in the next growing season.
P9.5 (LO 3) (Gross Profit Method) Yu Ltd. lost most of its inventory in a fire in
December just before the year-end physical inventory was taken. Company records disclose
the following (yen in thousands).
Inventory (beginning) ¥ 80,000 Sales
¥415,000
Purchases
290,000 Sales returns
21,000
Purchase returns
28,000 Gross profit % based on net selling price
35%
Merchandise with a selling price of ¥30,000 remained undamaged after the fire, and
damaged merchandise has a residual value of ¥8,150. The company does not carry fire

--- Page 750 ---
insurance on its inventory.
Instructions
Prepare a formal labeled schedule computing the fire loss incurred. (Do not use the retail
inventory method.)
P9.6 (LO 3) 
 (Gross Profit Method) On April 15, 2022, fire damaged the office
and warehouse of Stanislaw ASA. The only accounting record saved was the general ledger,
from which the trial balance below was prepared.
Stanislaw ASA
Trial Balance
March 31, 2022
Cash
€ 20,000
Accounts receivable
40,000
Inventory, December 31, 2021
75,000
Land
35,000
Equipment
110,000
Accumulated depreciation—equipment
€ 41,300
Other assets
3,600
Accounts payable
23,700
Other expense accruals
10,200
Share capital—ordinary
100,000
Retained earnings
52,000
Sales revenue
135,000
Purchases
52,000
Miscellaneous expenses
26,600
€362,200 €362,200
The following data and information have been gathered.
1. The fiscal year of the company ends on December 31.
2. An examination of the April bank statement and canceled checks revealed that checks
written during the period April 1–15 totaled €13,000: €5,700 paid to accounts payable as
of March 31, €3,400 for April merchandise shipments, and €3,900 paid for other
expenses. Deposits during the same period amounted to €12,950, which consisted of
receipts on account from customers with the exception of a €950 refund from a vendor
for merchandise returned in April.
3. Correspondence with suppliers revealed unrecorded obligations at April 15 of €15,600
for April merchandise shipments, including €2,300 for shipments in transit (f.o.b.
shipping point) on that date.
4. Customers acknowledged indebtedness of €46,000 at April 15, 2022. It was also
estimated that customers owed another €8,000 that will never be acknowledged or
recovered. Of the acknowledged indebtedness, €600 will probably be uncollectible.

--- Page 751 ---
5. The companies insuring the inventory agreed that Stanislaw’s fire-loss claim should be
based on the assumption that the overall gross profit ratio for the past 2 years was in
effect during the current year. The company’s audited financial statements disclosed this
information:
Year Ended
December 31
2021
2020
Net sales
€530,000 €390,000
Net purchases
280,000
235,000
Beginning inventory
50,000
66,000
Ending inventory
75,000
50,000
6. Inventory with a cost of €7,000 was salvaged and sold for €3,500. The balance of the
inventory was a total loss.
Instructions
Prepare a schedule computing the amount of inventory fire loss. The supporting schedule of
the computation of the gross profit should be in good form.
P9.7 (LO 4) (Retail Inventory Method) The records for the Clothing Department of
Wei’s Discount Store are summarized below for the month of January (HK$ in thousands).
Inventory, January 1: at retail HK$25,000; at cost HK$17,000
Purchases in January: at retail HK$137,000; at cost HK$82,500
Freight-in: HK$7,000
Purchase returns: at retail HK$3,000; at cost HK$2,300
Transfers-in from suburban branch: at retail HK$13,000; at cost HK$9,200
Net markups: HK$8,000
Net markdowns: HK$4,000
Inventory losses due to normal breakage, etc.: at retail HK$400
Sales at retail: HK$95,000
Sales returns: HK$2,400
Instructions
a. Compute the inventory for this department as of January 31, at retail prices.
b. Compute the ending inventory using lower-of-average-cost-or-net realizable value.
P9.8 (LO 4) (Retail Inventory Method) Presented below is information related to
Waveland Inc.
Cost
Retail
Inventory, 12/31/22
$250,000 $ 390,000
Purchases
914,500 1,460,000

--- Page 752 ---
Purchase returns
60,000
80,000
Purchase discounts
18,000
—
Gross sales (after employee discounts)
—
1,410,000
Sales returns
—
97,500
Markups
—
120,000
Markup cancellations
—
40,000
Markdowns
—
45,000
Markdown cancellations
—
20,000
Freight-in
42,000
—
Employee discounts granted
—
8,000
Loss from breakage (normal)
—
4,500
Instructions
Assuming that Waveland Inc. uses the conventional retail inventory method, compute the
cost of its ending inventory at December 31, 2022.
P9.9 (LO 4) 
 (Retail Inventory Method) Fuque Ltd. uses the retail inventory
method to estimate ending inventory for its monthly financial statements. The following
data pertain to a single department for the month of October 2022.
Inventory, October 1, 2022
At cost
£ 52,000
At retail
78,000
Purchases (exclusive of freight and returns)
At cost
272,000
At retail
423,000
Freight-in
16,600
Purchase returns
At cost
5,600
At retail
8,000
Markups
9,000
Markup cancellations
2,000
Markdowns (net)
3,600
Normal spoilage and breakage
10,000
Sales
390,000
Instructions
a. Using the conventional retail method, prepare a schedule computing estimated LCNRV
inventory for October 31, 2022.
b. A department store using the conventional retail inventory method estimates the cost of
its ending inventory as £60,000. An accurate physical count reveals only £47,000 of

--- Page 753 ---
inventory at LCNRV. List the factors that may have caused the difference between the
computed inventory and the physical count.
P9.10 (LO 1, 2, 5) (Statement and Note Disclosure, LCNRV, and Purchase
Commitment) Maddox Specialty Company, a division of Lost World Inc., manufactures
three models of gear shift components for bicycles that are sold to bicycle manufacturers,
retailers, and catalog outlets. Since beginning operations in 1986, Maddox has used normal
absorption costing and has assumed a first-in, first-out cost flow in its perpetual inventory
system. The balances of the inventory accounts at the end of Maddox’s fiscal year, November
30, 2022, are shown below. The inventories are stated at cost before any year-end
adjustments.
Finished goods
$647,000
Work-in-process
112,500
Raw materials
264,000
Factory supplies
69,000
The following information relates to Maddox’s inventory and operations.
1. The finished goods inventory consists of the items analyzed below.
Cost
Net Realizable Value
Down tube shifter
Standard model
$ 67,500
$ 67,000
Click adjustment model
94,500
89,000
Deluxe model
108,000
110,000
Total down tube shifters
270,000
266,000
Bar end shifter
Standard model
83,000
90,050
Click adjustment model
99,000
97,550
Total bar end shifters
182,000
187,600
Head tube shifter
Standard model
78,000
77,650
Click adjustment model
117,000
119,300
Total head tube shifters
195,000
196,950
Total finished goods
$647,000
$650,550
2. One-half of the head tube shifter finished goods inventory is held by catalog outlets on
consignment.
3. Three-quarters of the bar end shifter finished goods inventory has been pledged as
collateral for a bank loan.
4. One-half of the raw materials balance represents derailleurs acquired at a contracted
price 20% above the current market price. The net realizable value of the rest of the raw
materials is $127,400.
5. The net realizable value of the work-in-process inventory is $108,700.

--- Page 754 ---
6. Included in the cost of factory supplies are obsolete items with an historical cost of
$4,200. The net realizable value of the remaining factory supplies is $65,900.
7. Maddox applies the LCNRV method to each of the three types of shifters in finished
goods inventory. For each of the other three inventory accounts, Maddox applies the
LCNRV method to the total of each inventory account.
8. Consider all amounts presented above to be material in relation to Maddox’s financial
statements taken as a whole.
Instructions
a. Prepare the inventory section of Maddox’s statement of financial position as of
November 30, 2022, including any required note(s).
b. Without prejudice to your answer to (a), assume that the net realizable value of
Maddox’s inventories is less than cost. Explain how this decline would be presented in
Maddox’s income statement for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2022.
c. Assume that Maddox has a firm purchase commitment for the same type of derailleur
included in the raw materials inventory as of November 30, 2022, and that the purchase
commitment is at a contracted price 15% greater than the current market price. These
derailleurs are to be delivered to Maddox after November 30, 2022. Discuss the impact,
if any, that this purchase commitment would have on Maddox’s financial statements
prepared for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2022.
P9.11 (LO 1) 
 (LCNRV) Taipai Ltd. follows the practice of valuing its inventory at
the LCNRV. The following information is available from the company’s inventory records as
of December 31, 2022 (amounts in thousands).
Item Quantity Unit Cost Estimated Selling Price/Unit Completion & Selling Cost/Unit
A
1,100 NT$7.50
NT$10.50
NT$1.50
B
800
8.20
9.40
1.30
C
1,000
5.60
7.20
1.75
D
1,000
3.80
6.30
1.80
E
1,400
6.40
6.70
0.70
Instructions
Jay Shin is an accounting clerk in the accounting department of Taipai Co., and he cannot
understand how completion and selling costs affect the determination of net realizable value.
Jay is very confused, and he is the one who records inventory purchases and calculates
ending inventory. You are the manager of the department and an accountant.
a. Calculate the LCNRV using the “individual-item” approach.
b. Show the journal entry he will need to make in order to write down the ending inventory
from cost to NRV.
c. Then, write a memo to Jay explaining what net realizable value is, as well as how it is
computed. Use your calculations to aid in your explanation.

--- Page 755 ---
Concepts for Analysis
CA9.1 (LO 1) 
 (LCNRV) You have been asked by the financial vice president to
develop a short presentation on the LCNRV method for inventory purposes. The financial VP
needs to explain this method to the president because it appears that a portion of the
company’s inventory has declined in value.
Instructions
The financial vice president asks you to answer the following questions.
a. What is the purpose of the LCNRV method?
b. What is meant by “net realizable value”?
c. Do you apply the LCNRV method to each individual item, to a category, or to the total of
the inventory? Explain.
d. What are the potential disadvantages of the LCNRV method?
CA9.2 (LO 1) 
 (LCNRV) The net realizable value of Lake Corporation’s inventory
has declined below its cost. Allyn Conan, the controller, wants to use the loss method to
write down inventory because it more clearly discloses the decline in the net realizable value
and does not distort the cost of goods sold. His supervisor, financial vice president Bill Ortiz,
prefers the cost-of-goods-sold method to write down inventory because it does not call
attention to the decline in net realizable value.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What, if any, is the ethical issue involved?
b. Is any stakeholder harmed if Bill Ortiz’s preference is used?
c. What should Allyn Conan do?
CA9.3 (LO 1) (LCNRV) Ogala NV purchased a significant amount of raw materials
inventory for a new product that it is manufacturing.
Ogala uses the LCNRV rule for these raw materials. The net realizable value of the raw
materials is below the original cost.
Ogala uses the FIFO inventory method for these raw materials. In the last 2 years, each
purchase has been at a lower price than the previous purchase, and the ending inventory
quantity for each period has been higher than the beginning inventory quantity for that
period.
Instructions
a. 
1. At which amount should Ogala’s raw materials inventory be reported on the
statement of financial position? Why?
2. In general, why is the LCNRV rule used to report inventory?
b. What would have been the effect on ending inventory and cost of goods sold had Ogala
used the average-cost inventory method instead of the FIFO inventory method for the

--- Page 756 ---
raw materials? Why?
CA9.4 (LO 4) 
 (Retail Inventory Method) Saurez Company, your client,
manufactures paint. The company’s president, Maria Saurez, has decided to open a retail
store to sell Saurez paint as well as wallpaper and other supplies that would be purchased
from other suppliers. She has asked you for information about the conventional retail
method of pricing inventories at the retail store.
Instructions
Prepare a report to the president explaining the retail method of pricing inventories. Your
report should include the following points.
a. Description and accounting features of the method.
b. The conditions that may distort the results under the method.
c. A comparison of the advantages of using the retail method with those of using cost
methods of inventory pricing.
d. The accounting theory underlying the treatment of net markdowns and net markups
under the method.
CA9.5 (LO 1, 4) (Cost Determination, LCNRV, Retail Method) Olson ASA, a retailer
and wholesaler of brand-name household lighting fixtures, purchases its inventories from
various suppliers.
Instructions
a. 
1. What criteria should be used to determine which of Olson’s costs are inventoriable?
2. Are Olson’s administrative costs inventoriable? Defend your answer.
b. 
1. Olson uses the LCNRV rule for its wholesale inventories. What are the theoretical
arguments for that rule?
2. The net realizable value of the inventories is below the original cost. What amount
should be used to value the inventories? Why?
c. Olson calculates the estimated cost of its ending inventories held for sale at retail using
the conventional retail inventory method. How would Olson treat the beginning
inventories and net markdowns in calculating the cost ratio used to determine its ending
inventories? Why?
CA9.6 (LO 2) 
 (Purchase Commitments) Prophet Company signed a long-term
purchase contract to buy timber from the government forest service at $300 per thousand
board feet. Under these terms, Prophet must cut and pay $6,000,000 for this timber during
the next year. Currently, the market governmental price is $250 per thousand board feet. At
this rate, the market price is $5,000,000. Hu Cho, the controller, wants to recognize the loss
in value on the year-end financial statements, but the financial vice president, Rondo Star,
argues that the loss is temporary and should be ignored. Cho notes that market price has
remained near $250 for many months, and he sees no sign of significant change.
Instructions
a. What are the ethical issues, if any?

--- Page 757 ---
b. Is any particular stakeholder harmed by the financial vice president’s decision?
c. What should the controller do?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s
complete annual report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following
questions.
a. How does M&S value its inventories? Which inventory costing method does M&S use as
a basis for reporting its inventories?
b. How does M&S report its inventories in the statement of financial position? In the notes
to its financial statements, what descriptions are used to classify its inventories?
c. What was M&S inventory turnover in 2019? What is its gross profit percentage?
Evaluate M&S’s inventory turnover and its gross profit percentage.
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B
and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial
statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. What is the amount of inventory reported by adidas at December 31, 2018, and by Puma
at December 31, 2018? What percent of total assets is invested in inventory by each
company?
b. What inventory costing methods are used by adidas and Puma? How does each company
value its inventories?
c. In the notes, what classifications (description) are used by adidas and Puma to
categorize their inventories?
d. Compute and compare the inventory turnovers and days to sell inventory for adidas and
Puma for 2018. Indicate why there might be a significant difference between the two
companies.
Financial Statement Analysis Case
Barrick Gold Corporation

--- Page 758 ---
Barrick Gold Corporation (CAN) is the world’s largest and most profitable gold mining
company outside South Africa. Part of the key to Barrick’s success has been its ability to
maintain cash flow while improving production and increasing its reserves of gold claims.
Recently, Barrick has achieved record growth in cash flow, production, and reserves.
The company maintains an aggressive policy of developing previously identified target areas
that may contain large amounts of gold ore and that have not been previously developed.
Barrick limits their risk by choosing sites that are located in politically stable regions and by
their use of internally generated funds, rather than debt, to finance growth.
Barrick’s inventories are as follows.
Barrick Gold Corporation
Inventories (in millions, U.S. dollars)
Current
Gold in process
$133
Mine operating supplies
82
$215
Non-current (included in Other assets)
Ore in stockpiles
$ 65
Instructions
a. Why do you think that there are no finished goods inventories? Why do you think that
the raw material (stockpiles of ore) is considered to be a non-current asset?
b. Consider that Barrick has no finished goods inventories. What journal entries are made
to record a sale?
c. Suppose that gold bullion that cost $1.8 million to produce was sold for $2.4 million.
The journal entry was made to record the sale, but no entry was made to remove the
gold from the gold in process inventory. How would this error affect the following?
Statement of Financial Position Income Statement
Inventory
? Cost of goods sold ?
Retained earnings
? Net income
?
Accounts payable
?
Working capital
?
Current ratio
?
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Englehart Company sells two types of pumps. One is large and is for commercial use. The
other is smaller and is used in residential swimming pools. The following inventory data are
available for the month of March.
Units Value per Unit
Total
Residential Pumps

--- Page 759 ---
Inventory at Feb. 28:
200
$ 400 $ 80,000
Purchases:
March 10
500
$ 450 $225,000
March 20
400
$ 475 $190,000
March 30
300
$ 500 $150,000
Sales:
March 15
500
$ 540 $270,000
March 25
400
$ 570 $228,000
Inventory at Mar. 31:
500
Commercial Pumps
Inventory at Feb. 28:
600
$ 800 $480,000
Purchases:
March 3
600
$ 900 $540,000
March 12
300
$ 950 $285,000
March 21
500
$1,000 $500,000
Sales:
March 18
900
$1,080 $972,000
March 29
600
$1,140 $684,000
Inventory at Mar. 31:
500
In addition to the above information, due to a downturn in the economy that has hit
Englehart’s commercial customers especially hard, Englehart expects commercial pump
prices from March 31 onward to be considerably different (and lower) than at the beginning
of and during March. Englehart has developed the following additional information.
Commercial Pumps Residential Pumps
Expected selling price (per unit, net of costs to sell)
$1,050
$580
Costs to complete
150
30
Englehart uses the FIFO accounting method.
Accounting
a. Determine the dollar amount that Englehart should report on its March 31 statement of
financial position for inventory. Assume Englehart applies LCNRV at the individual-
product level.
b. Repeat part (a) but assume Englehart applies LCNRV at the major-group level.
Englehart places both commercial and residential pumps into the same (and only)
group.
Analysis
Which of the two above approaches (individual-product or major-group level) for applying
LCNRV gives the financial statement reader better information?

--- Page 760 ---
Principles
Assume that during April, the net realizable value of commercial pumps rebounds to $1,060.
Briefly describe how Englehart’s April financial statements changed with respect to its
inventory remaining from March 31 under IFRS.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 6.
[2] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), paras. 28–29.
[3] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 29.
[4] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 33.
[5] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 21.
[6] International Accounting Standard 41, Agriculture (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[7] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), paras. 3–4.
[8] International Accounting Standard 37, Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent
Assets (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001),
paras. 66–68.
[9] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2018), par. 4.46.
[10] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 36.
Research Case
Jones Co. is in a technology-intensive industry. Recently, one of its competitors introduced a
new product with technology that might render obsolete some of Jones’s inventory. The
accounting staff wants to follow the appropriate authoritative literature in determining the
accounting for this significant market event.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS
access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in
your Internet browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the authoritative literature addressing inventory pricing.

--- Page 761 ---
b. List three types of goods that are classified as inventory. What characteristic will
automatically exclude an item from being classified as inventory?
c. Define “net realizable value” as used in the phrase “lower-of-cost-or-net realizable
value.”
d. Explain when it is acceptable to state inventory above cost and which industries allow
this practice.
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the accounting for inventories under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
In most cases, IFRS and U.S. GAAP related to inventory are the same. The major differences
are that IFRS prohibits the use of the LIFO cost flow assumption and records market in the
LCNRV differently.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
inventories.
Similarities
U.S. GAAP and IFRS account for inventory acquisitions at historical cost and evaluate
inventory for lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (market) subsequent to acquisition.
Who owns the goods—goods in transit, consigned goods, special sales agreements—as
well as the costs to include in inventory are essentially accounted for the same under
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Differences
U.S. GAAP provides more detailed guidelines in inventory accounting. The requirements
for accounting for and reporting inventories are more principles-based under IFRS.
A major difference between U.S. GAAP and IFRS relates to the LIFO cost flow
assumption. U.S. GAAP permits the use of LIFO for inventory valuation. IFRS prohibits
its use. FIFO and average-cost are the only two acceptable cost flow assumptions
permitted under IFRS. Both sets of standards permit specific identification where
appropriate.
In the lower-of-cost-or-market test for inventory valuation, U.S. GAAP defines market as
replacement cost subject to the constraints of net realizable value (the ceiling) and net
realizable value less a normal markup (the floor) for inventories accounted for under
LIFO or retail methods. IFRS defines market as net realizable value and does not use a
ceiling or a floor to determine market.
Under U.S. GAAP, if inventory is written down under the lower-of-cost-or-market
valuation, the new basis is now considered its cost. As a result, the inventory may not be
written up back to its original cost in a subsequent period. Under IFRS, the write-down

--- Page 762 ---
may be reversed in a subsequent period up to the amount of the previous write-down.
Both the write-down and any subsequent reversal should be reported on the income
statement.
IFRS requires both biological assets and agricultural produce at the point of harvest to
be reported at net realizable value. U.S. GAAP does not require companies to account for
all biological assets in the same way. Furthermore, these assets generally are not
reported at net realizable value. Disclosure requirements also differ between the two
sets of standards.
About the Numbers
Illustration GAAP 9.1 presents a disclosure under U.S. GAAP related to inventories for
Altria Group, Inc. (USA), which reflects application of U.S. GAAP to its inventories.
On the Horizon
One convergence issue that will be difficult to resolve relates to the use of the LIFO cost flow
assumption. As indicated, IFRS specifically prohibits its use. Conversely, the LIFO cost flow
assumption is widely used in the United States because of its favorable tax advantages. In
addition, many argue that LIFO from a financial reporting point of view provides a better
matching of current costs against revenue and therefore enables companies to compute a
more realistic income.
Altria Group, Inc. (USA)
Current assets (in millions of $)
Inventories (Note 2):
Leaf tobacco
$ 940
Other raw materials
186
Work-in-process
647
Finished product
558
Total
$2,331
Note 2: Inventories
The last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method is used to determine the cost of substantially all
tobacco inventories. The cost of the remaining inventories is determined using the first-in,
first-out (“FIFO”) and average cost methods. Inventories that are measured using the LIFO
method are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories that are measured using the
FIFO and average cost methods are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. It is
a generally recognized industry practice to classify leaf tobacco and wine inventories as
current assets, although part of such inventory, because of the duration of the curing and
aging process, ordinarily would not be used within one year.
ILLUSTRATION GAAP 9.1 U.S. GAAP Inventory, Presentation and Disclosure
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. All of the following are key similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for inventories except:

--- Page 763 ---
a. costs to include in inventories are similar.
b. LIFO cost flow assumption where appropriate is used by both sets of standards.
c. fair value valuation of inventories is prohibited by both sets of standards.
d. guidelines on ownership of goods are similar.
2. All of the following are key differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for inventories except the:
a. definition of the lower-of-cost-or-market test for inventory valuation differs between
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
b. average-cost method is prohibited under IFRS.
c. inventory basis determination for write-downs differs between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
d. guidelines are more principles-based under IFRS than they are under U.S. GAAP.
3. Starfish Company (a company using U.S. GAAP and the LIFO inventory method) is
considering changing to IFRS and the FIFO inventory method. How would a comparison of
these methods affect Starfish’s financials?
a. During a period of inflation, working capital would decrease when IFRS and the FIFO
inventory method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
b. During a period of inflation, the taxes will decrease when IFRS and the FIFO inventory
method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
c. During a period of inflation, net income would be greater if IFRS and the FIFO inventory
method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
d. During a period of inflation, the current ratio would decrease when IFRS and the FIFO
inventory method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
4. Assume that Darcy Industries had the following inventory values.
Inventory cost (on December 31, 2022)
$1,500
Inventory market (on December 31, 2022) amount between ceiling and floor $1,280
Inventory net realizable value (on December 31, 2022)
$1,300
Under U.S. GAAP, what is the inventory carrying value on December 31, 2022?
a. $1,500.
b. $1,570.
c. $1,300.
d. $1,280.
5. Under U.S. GAAP, biological assets:
a. are accounted for the same way as under IFRS.
b. are all to be accounted for in the same way.

--- Page 764 ---
c. generally are not accounted for at net realizable value.
d. None of the answer choices is correct.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP9.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and
IFRS with respect to the accounting for inventories.
GAAP9.2 LaTour SA is based in France and prepares its financial statements in accordance
with IFRS. In 2022, it reported cost of goods sold of €578 million and average inventory of
€154 million. Briefly discuss how analysis of LaTour’s inventory turnover (and comparisons
to a company using U.S. GAAP) might be affected by differences in inventory accounting
between IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
GAAP9.3 Reed Pentak, a finance major, has been following globalization and made the
following observation concerning accounting convergence: “I do not see many obstacles
concerning development of a single accounting standard for inventories.” Prepare a response
to Reed to explain the main obstacle to achieving convergence in the area of inventory
accounting.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1.b 2.b 3.c 4.d 5.c
Notes
1 It may be necessary to write down an entire product line or a group of inventories in a given
geographic area that cannot be practicably evaluated separately. However, it is not
appropriate to write down an entire class of inventory, such as finished goods or all
inventory of a particular industry. [3]
2 The rationale for use of the individual-item approach whenever practicable is to avoid
realization of unrealized gains, which can arise when applying LCNRV on a similar-or-
related-items approach (e.g., unrealized gains on some items offset unrealized losses on
other items). In general, IFRS prohibits recognition of unrealized gains in income.
3 Materials and other supplies held for use in the production of inventories are not written
down below cost if the finished products in which they will be incorporated are expected
to be sold at or above cost. However, a decline in the price of materials may indicate that
the cost of the finished products exceeds net realizable value. In this situation, the
materials are written down to net realizable value.
4 Manufacturing companies frequently employ a standardized cost system that both
predetermines the unit costs for material, labor, and manufacturing overhead, and values
raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods inventories at their standard costs.
Standard costs take into account normal levels of materials and supplies, labor, efficiency,
and capacity utilization, and are regularly reviewed and, if necessary, revised in the light of
current conditions. For financial reporting purposes, the standard cost method may be
used for convenience if the results approximate cost. [5] Nokia (FIN) and Hewlett-
Packard (USA) use standard costs for valuing at least a portion of their inventories.

--- Page 765 ---
5 A gain may arise on initial recognition of a biological asset, such as when a calf is born. A
gain or loss may arise on initial recognition of agricultural produce as a result of
harvesting. Losses may arise on initial recognition for agricultural assets because costs to
sell are deducted in determining fair value less costs to sell.
6 Measurement at fair value or selling price less point of sale costs corresponds to the net
realizable value measure in the LCNRV test (selling price less estimated costs to complete
and sell) since at harvest, the agricultural product is complete and is ready for sale. [7]
7 Changes in fair value arising from growth and harvesting from mature cows can be
estimated based on changes in the market prices of the cows in the herd, depending on
their age.
8 Minerals and mineral products, such as coal or iron ore, may also be measured at net
realizable value in accordance with well-established industry practices. In the mining
industry, when minerals have been extracted, there is often an assured sale in an active
market, or under a forward contract or government guarantee. Because there is negligible
risk of failure to sell, measurement at net realizable value is justified. In these contexts,
and similar to the accounting for agricultural assets, minerals and mineral products are
recorded at net realizable value at the point of extraction, with a gain recorded in the
period of extraction. In subsequent periods, changes in value of minerals and mineral
products inventory are recognized in profit or loss in the period of the change.
9 In a survey of 175 international companies, commitments to purchase goods and services
were mentioned 83 times. See P. Walters, IFRS Accounting Trends and Techniques
(AICPA, 2012).
10 Such a contract is deemed to be onerous, which is defined as a contract under which the
unavoidable costs of satisfying the obligations exceed the economic benefits expected. [8]
This concept is discussed in more detail in Chapter 13.
11 Appendix 17A provides a complete discussion of hedging and the use of derivatives such as
futures.
12 An alternative method of estimating inventory using the gross profit percentage is
considered by some to be less complicated than the traditional method. This alternative
method uses the standard income statement format as follows. (Assume the same data as
in the Cetus example above.)
Relationships
Solution
Sales revenue
€280,000
€280,000
Cost of sales
Beginning inventory
€ 60,000
€ 60,000
Purchases
200,000
200,000
Goods available for sale
260,000
260,000
Ending inventory
(3) ?
(3) 64,000 Est.
Cost of goods sold
(2) ?
(2)196,000 Est.
Gross profit on sales (30%)
(1) ?
(1) 84,000 Est.

--- Page 766 ---
Compute the unknowns as follows: first the gross profit amount, then cost of goods sold, and finally the ending
inventory, as shown below.
(1) €280,000 × .30 = €84,000 (gross profit on sales).
(2) €280,000 − €84,000 = €196,000 (cost of goods sold).
(3) €260,000 − €196,000 = €64,000 (ending inventory).
13 The terms gross margin percentage, rate of gross profit, and percentage markup are
synonymous, although companies more commonly use markup in reference to cost and
gross profit in reference to sales.
14 This figure is not really net realizable value, but it is net realizable value less the normal
margin that is allowed. In other words, the sales price of the goods written down is €2, but
subtracting a normal margin of 50 percent (€5 cost ÷ €10 price), the figure becomes €1.
To the extent the profit margin approximates expected costs to complete and sell an item,
this measure approximates net realizable value.
15 When the purchase allowance is not reflected by a reduction in the selling price, no
adjustment is made to the retail column.
16 Note that if employee sales are recorded gross, no adjustment is necessary for employee
discounts in the retail column.

--- Page 767 ---
