CHAPTER 20
Accounting for Pensions and Postretirement
Benefits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Discuss the fundamentals of pension plan accounting.
2. Use a worksheet for employer’s pension plan entries.
3. Explain the accounting for past service costs.
4. Explain the accounting for remeasurements.
5. Describe the requirements for reporting pension plans in
financial statements.
6. Explain the accounting for other postretirement benefits.

--- Page 1786 ---
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual
discussions that are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 20
As the opening story indicates, the market effects reverberating
from the financial crisis of 2008 continue to be felt, putting
pension plans in peril and increasing the cost of retirement
benefits. For example, British Airways’ (GBR) pension and
healthcare costs for retirees in a recent year totaled £149 million,
or approximately £4 per passenger carried. Many other companies
have substantial pension and other postretirement expenses and
obligations as well. The content and organization of the chapter
are as follows.
Pension Peril
The effects of the financial crisis of 2008 and the resultant economic
downturn rippled through global markets. Pension plans, both those
sponsored by governments and by private companies, still feel the
effects. Consider the following actions by private companies to deal
with the continuing repercussions of the financial crisis.
In the last three years, General Electric (USA) has faced major
challenges. The company’s share price has declined by over 75

--- Page 1787 ---
percent, primarily due to a series of financially disastrous
decisions by the former management that has led to a severe cash
crunch. In response, the company’s pension plan is being
adjusted. First, the plan was closed to new entrants. More
recently, the company announced that the plan was freezing
salaried benefits for 20,000 employees. Because of the freeze,
these employees would earn no additional new pension benefits
over the remainder of their employment.
United Utilities (GBR) made its defined benefit pension
schemes less generous to employees as the United Kingdom’s
biggest listed water company cut costs in the face of a harsher
regulatory regime. The company amended the terms of its defined
benefit schemes to increase contributions made by members,
while also increasing the retirement age and capping increases in
pensionable salaries.
Marks and Spencer plc (GBR) increased contributions to
its pension plan (£800 million) to address a deficit in the plan
(assets relative to its pension obligations). However, the clothing
and food chain, which has 20,000 current members in its defined
benefits scheme, said it would not be following the growing band
of companies—such as BP (GBR) and Vodafone (GBR)—which
are closing their final salary schemes to existing members.
Just as market declines create challenges for companies and their
pension plans, market recoveries can quickly reverse the negative
consequences of market downturns for pension plans. For example, a
recent review of 100 large pension funds revealed that 16 of the funds
have a funding ratio (which is defined as pension assets divided by
pension liabilities) greater than 100 percent and that the average
funding ratio is up 87 percent relative to the prior year. A good
example is Marks and Spencer. It reported a net pension liability or
deficit of £283.3 million at the height of the financial crisis in 2008.
In 2019, the company reported a pension surplus of £914.3 million—
quite a swing in an 11-year period.
Why are pension plans so vulnerable to the effects of swings in
financial markets? As you will learn in this chapter, pensions are a

--- Page 1788 ---
form of deferred compensation. When a pension is included in a
salary and benefit package, employees may accept lower pay while
working in exchange for pension benefits that will be paid in the
future at retirement. Companies and governments must set aside
assets to meet these future obligations. However, when economic
times are tough, assets in the funds (shares and bonds) lose value,
and companies and governments may not have the resources to
contribute to the funds. As a result, a pension deficit arises, and
employees’ pensions may be in peril. Given the need for good
information about the impact of these continuing pension perils on
companies, the IASB has developed comprehensive rules on the
accounting for pensions and other postretirement benefit plans.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter
for a targeted summary review and practice problem with solution.
Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as
additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also
available online.
Fundamentals of Pension Plan Accounting
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Discuss the fundamentals of pension plan accounting.
A pension plan is an arrangement whereby an employer provides
benefits (payments) to retired employees for services they performed
in their working years. Pension accounting may be divided and
separately treated as accounting for the employer and
accounting for the pension fund. The company or employer is
the organization sponsoring the pension plan. It incurs the cost and
makes contributions to the pension fund. The fund or plan is the
entity that receives the contributions from the employer, administers
the pension assets, and makes the benefit payments to the retired

--- Page 1789 ---
employees (pension recipients). Illustration 20.1 shows the three
entities involved in a pension plan and indicates the flow of cash
among them.
ILLUSTRATION 20.1 Flow of Cash Among Pension Plan
Participants
A pension plan is funded when the employer makes payments to a
funding agency.1 That agency accumulates the assets of the pension
fund and makes payments to the recipients as the benefits come due.
Some pension plans are contributory. In these, the employees bear
part of the cost of the stated benefits or voluntarily make payments to
increase their benefits. Other plans are non-contributory. In these
plans, the employer bears the entire cost. In some countries,
companies design their pension plans so as to take advantage of
certain income tax benefits. Plans that offer tax benefits are often
called qualified pension plans. They permit deductibility of the
employer’s contributions to the pension fund and tax-free
status of earnings from pension fund assets.
The pension fund should be a separate legal and accounting
entity. The pension fund, as a separate entity, maintains a set of
books and prepares financial statements. Maintaining records and
preparing financial statements for the fund, an activity known as
“accounting for employee benefit plans,” is not the subject of this
chapter.2 Instead, this chapter explains the pension accounting and
reporting problems of the employer as the sponsor of a pension
plan.

--- Page 1790 ---
The need to properly administer and account for pension funds
becomes apparent when you understand the size of these funds.
Illustration 20.2 lists the pension fund assets and pension expenses
of six major companies in a recent year. The two most common types
of pension plans are defined contribution plans and defined
benefit plans. We look at each of them in the following sections.
Company
Size of
Pension
Fund*
2018
Pension
Expense*
Pension Expense as % of
Pretax Income (Loss)
Siemens (DEU)
€31,307
€692
9.20%
AB InBev (BEL)
€ 5,059
€193
2.26%
BASF (DEU)
€19,280
€730
13.80%
Cathay Pacific
(HKG)
$7,074
$293
9.03%
Dairy Farm
International
(CHN)
$
169
$ 23
12.79%
Unilever (GBR)
€20,867
€464
3.75%
*Amounts in millions.
ILLUSTRATION 20.2 Pension Funds and Pension Expense
Defined Contribution Plan
In a defined contribution plan, the employer agrees to contribute
to a pension trust a certain sum each period, based on a formula. This
formula may consider such factors as age, length of employee service,
employer’s profits, and compensation level. The plan defines only
the employer’s contribution. It makes no promise regarding the
ultimate benefits paid out to the employees.
The size of the pension benefits that the employee finally collects
under the plan depends on several factors: the amounts originally
contributed to the pension trust, the income accumulated in the trust,
and the treatment of forfeitures of funds caused by early terminations

--- Page 1791 ---
of other employees. A company usually turns over to an
independent third-party trustee the amounts originally
contributed. The trustee, acting on behalf of the beneficiaries (the
participating employees), assumes ownership of the pension assets
and is accountable for their investment and distribution. The trust is
separate and distinct from the employer.
The accounting for a defined contribution plan is
straightforward. The employee gets the benefit of gain (or the risk
of loss) from the assets contributed to the pension plan. The employer
simply contributes each year based on the formula established in the
plan. As a result, the employer’s annual cost (pension expense) is
simply the amount that it is obligated to contribute to the pension
trust. The employer reports a liability on its statement of financial
position only if it does not make the contribution in full. The
employer reports an asset only if it contributes more than the
required amount and must disclose the amount of expense recorded
for the defined contribution plan. [2]
Defined Benefit Plan
A defined benefit plan outlines the benefits that employees will
receive when they retire. These benefits typically are a function of an
employee’s years of service and of the compensation level in the years
approaching retirement.
To meet the defined benefit commitments that will arise at
retirement, a company must determine what the contribution should
be today (a time value of money computation). Companies may use
many different contribution approaches. However, the funding
method should provide enough money at retirement to meet the
benefits defined by the plan.
The employees are the beneficiaries of a defined contribution
trust, but the employer is the beneficiary of a defined benefit trust.
Under a defined benefit plan, the trust’s primary purpose is to
safeguard and invest assets so that there will be enough to pay the
employer’s obligation to the employees. In form, the trust is a
separate entity. In substance, the trust assets and liabilities belong

--- Page 1792 ---
to the employer. That is, as long as the plan continues, the
employer is responsible for the payment of the defined
benefits (without regard to what happens in the trust). The
employer must make up any shortfall in the accumulated assets held
by the trust. On the other hand, the employer can recapture any
excess accumulated in the trust, either through reduced future
funding or through a reversion of funds.
Because a defined benefit plan specifies benefits in terms of uncertain
future variables, a company must establish an appropriate funding
pattern to ensure the availability of funds at retirement in order to
provide the benefits promised. This funding level depends on a
number of factors such as turnover, mortality, length of employee
service, compensation levels, and interest earnings.
Employers are at risk with defined benefit plans because they
must contribute enough to meet the cost of benefits that the
plan defines. The expense recognized each period is not necessarily
equal to the cash contribution. Similarly, the liability is controversial
because its measurement and recognition relate to unknown future
variables. Thus, the accounting issues related to this type of plan are
complex. Our discussion in the following sections deals
primarily with defined benefit plans.3

--- Page 1793 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Which Plan Is Right for You?
Defined contribution plans are more popular with employers than
defined benefit plans. One reason is that they are cheaper. Defined
contribution plans often cost no more than 3 percent of payroll,
whereas defined benefit plans can cost 5 to 6 percent of payroll.
In some countries, employees are required to explicitly opt out of
an employer-sponsored defined contribution plan. This should
help employees build their own nest eggs and will contribute to
further growth in defined contribution plans. However, note the
following three warnings: (1) low-income workers will still not be
able to save enough, (2) it leaves each participant alone to manage
risk, and (3) companies establish a minimum contribution, which
too many participants choose to use, instead of a large
contribution.

--- Page 1794 ---
Although many companies are changing to defined contribution
plans, the number of existing defined benefit plans and benefits
paid from these plans are substantial. Further, while the balance
between defined benefit and defined contribution plans has been
shifting over time, there is also significant variation in the types of
plans across countries, as shown in the chart.
For 16 of the 20 countries shown in the chart, assets in defined
contribution plans outweighed those in defined benefit plans. In
four countries, including the Czech Republic and Poland, defined
benefit plans did not exist at all. Defined benefit funds dominate
pension markets in four countries, including Canada and
Switzerland.
Sources: Private Pension Plan Bulletin (2016),
www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/researchers/statistics/retirement-bulletins/private-
pension-plan; and “Pension Markets in Focus,” OECD (2019).

--- Page 1795 ---
The Role of Actuaries in Pension Accounting
The problems associated with pension plans involve complicated
mathematical considerations. Therefore, companies engage
actuaries to ensure that a pension plan is appropriate for the
employee group covered.4 Actuaries are individuals trained through a
long and rigorous certification program to assign probabilities to
future events and their financial effects. The insurance industry
employs actuaries to assess risks and to advise on the setting of
premiums and other aspects of insurance policies. Employers rely
heavily on actuaries for assistance in developing, implementing, and
funding pension funds.
Actuaries make predictions (called actuarial assumptions) of
mortality rates, employee turnover, interest and earnings rates, early
retirement frequency, future salaries, and any other factors necessary
to operate a pension plan. They also compute the various pension
measures that affect the financial statements, such as the pension
obligation, the annual cost of servicing the plan, and the cost of
amendments to the plan. In summary, accounting for defined benefit
pension plans relies heavily upon information and measurements
provided by actuaries.
Measures of the Liability
In accounting for a company’s pension plan, two questions arise. (1)
What is the pension obligation that a company should report in the
financial statements? (2) What is the pension expense for the period?
Attempting to answer the first question has produced much
controversy.
Alternative Approaches
Most agree that an employer’s pension obligation is the deferred
compensation obligation it has to its employees for their service under
the terms of the pension plan. Measuring that obligation is not so
simple, though, because there are alternative ways of measuring it.

--- Page 1796 ---
One measure of the pension obligation is to base it only on the
benefits vested to the employees. Vested benefits are those that the
employee is entitled to receive even if he or she renders no additional
services to the company. Most pension plans require a certain
minimum number of years of service to the employer before an
employee achieves vested benefits status. Companies compute the
vested benefit obligation using only vested benefits at current
salary levels.
Another way to measure the obligation uses both vested and non-
vested years of service. On this basis, the company computes the
deferred compensation amount on all years of employees’ service—
both vested and non-vested—using current salary levels. This
measurement of the pension obligation is called the accumulated
benefit obligation.
A third measure bases the deferred compensation amount on both
vested and non-vested service using future salaries. This
measurement of the pension obligation is called the defined benefit
obligation. Because future salaries are expected to be higher than
current salaries, this approach results in the largest measurement of
the pension obligation.
The choice between these measures is critical. The choice affects the
amount of a company’s pension liability and the annual pension
expense reported. The diagram in Illustration 20.3 presents the
differences in these three measurements.

--- Page 1797 ---
ILLUSTRATION 20.3 Different Measures of the Pension
Obligation
Which of these alternative measures of the pension liability does the
accounting profession favor? The profession adopted the defined
benefit obligation—the present value (without deducting any
plan assets) of the expected future payments required to
settle the obligation resulting from employee service in
current and prior periods.5 [4] Those in favor of the defined
benefit obligation contend that a promise by an employer to pay
benefits based on a percentage of the employees’ future salaries is far
greater than a promise to pay a percentage of their current salary, and
such a difference should be reflected in the pension liability and
pension expense.
Moreover, companies discount to present value the estimated future
benefits to be paid. Minor changes in the interest rate used to
discount pension benefits can dramatically affect the measurement of
the employer’s obligation. For example, a one percent decrease in the
discount rate can increase pension liabilities 15 percent. Accounting
rules require that, at each measurement date, a company must

--- Page 1798 ---
determine the appropriate discount rate used to measure the pension
liability, based on current interest rates. [5]
Net Defined Benefit Obligation (Asset)
The net defined benefit obligation (asset) (also referred to as the
funded status) is the deficit or surplus related to a defined pension
plan. The deficit or surplus is measured as follows.
Defined Benefit Obligation − Fair Value of Plan Assets (if
any)
The deficit or surplus is often referred to as the funded status of the
plan.
If the defined benefit obligation is greater than the plan assets, the
pension plan has a deficit. Conversely, if the defined benefit obligation
is less than the plan assets, the pension plan has a surplus.
Illustration 20.4 shows these relationships.
Deficit
Surplus
Defined benefit
obligation
€(1,000,000) Defined benefit
obligation
€(150,000)
Plan assets
900,000 Plan assets
200,000
Net defined benefit
obligation
€
(100,000) Net defined
benefit asset
€
50,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.4 Presentation of Funded Status
The net defined benefit obligation (asset) is often referred to simply
as the pension liability or the pension asset on the statement of
financial position.
As indicated, companies should report either a pension asset or
pension liability related to a pension plan on the statement of
financial position (often referred to as the net approach). To
illustrate, assume that at year-end Acer SpA has a defined benefit
obligation of €4,000,000 and plan assets of €3,700,000. In this case,

--- Page 1799 ---
Acer reports €300,000 (€4,000,000 − €3,700,000) as a pension
liability on its statement of financial position.
Some believe that companies should report separately both the
defined benefit obligation and the plan assets on the statement of
financial position. This approach (often referred to as the gross
approach) would report Acer’s defined benefit obligation of
€4,000,000 and its plan assets of €3,700,000 on the statement of
financial position. The IASB disagrees, indicating that offsetting these
amounts is consistent with its standard on when assets and liabilities
should be netted.6
Reporting Changes in the Defined Benefit Obligation
(Asset)
The IASB requires that all changes in the defined benefit obligation
and plan assets in the current period be recognized in comprehensive
income. This approach reflects application of accrual-based
accounting for pensions (expense recognition principle). That is,
companies report pension expense as employees work and earn
benefits rather than when employees are paid benefits after
retirement (referred to as cash basis or pay as you go). The Board
believes that immediate recognition of the effects of these changes in
the statement of comprehensive income provides the most
understandable and useful information to financial statement users.
The IASB requires that companies report changes arising from
different elements of pension liabilities and assets in different
sections of the statement of comprehensive income, depending on
their nature.
In the past, companies often reported only a single pension expense
number in the comprehensive income statement. Disclosing
additional segmentation of changes in the pension liability (including
the components of pension cost) provides additional transparency
about the nature of these costs. [7] The three components are as
follows.

--- Page 1800 ---
Service cost. Service cost is either current service cost or past
service cost. Current service cost is the increase in the present
value of the defined benefit obligation from employee service in
the current period. Past service cost is the change in the present
value of the defined benefit obligation for employee service for
prior periods—generally resulting from a plan amendment (e.g.,
changes to the plan). This component is reported in the statement
of comprehensive income in the operating section of the income
statement and affects net income.
Net interest. Net interest is computed by multiplying the
discount rate by the defined benefit obligation and the plan
assets. If the plan has a net defined benefit obligation at the end
of the period, the company reports interest expense. Conversely,
if it has a net defined benefit asset, it reports interest revenue.
This approach is justified because of its simplicity, and because
any financing costs should be based on the funded status of the
plan. This amount is often shown below the operating section of
the income statement in the financing section and affects net
income.
Remeasurements. Remeasurements are gains and losses
related to the defined benefit obligation (changes in discount rate
or other actuarial assumptions) and gains or losses on the fair
value of the plan assets (actual rate of return less interest
revenue included in the finance component). This component is
reported in other comprehensive income (OCI), net of tax. These
remeasurement gains or losses therefore affect
comprehensive income but not net income.
Illustration 20.5 shows the components of changes in the pension
liability (asset) and their placement on the statement of
comprehensive income.

--- Page 1801 ---
ILLUSTRATION 20.5 Reporting Changes in the Pension
Obligation (Assets)
As indicated in Illustration 20.5, service cost and net interest are
reported in net income. We discuss determination of each of these
components in the following section. Remeasurements, which are
reported in other comprehensive income, are discussed in a later
section.
Service Cost
To determine current service cost and the related increase in the
defined benefit obligation, companies must:
1. Apply an actuarial valuation method.
2. Assign benefits to period of service.
3. Make actuarial assumptions.7
In applying an actuarial valuation method, the IASB concluded that
companies must consider future compensation levels in
measuring the present obligation and periodic pension
expense if the plan’s benefit formula incorporates them. In
other words, the present obligation resulting from a promise to pay a
benefit of 1 percent of an employee’s final pay differs from the

--- Page 1802 ---
promise to pay 1 percent of current pay. To overlook this fact is to
ignore an important aspect of pension expense. Thus, the Board
adopts the projected unit credit method (often referred to as
the benefits/years-of-service method), which determines
pension expense based on future salary levels.
Some object to this determination, arguing that a company should
have more freedom to select an expense recognition pattern. Others
believe that incorporating future salary increases into current pension
expense is accounting for events that have not yet happened. They
argue that if a company terminates the plan today, it pays only
liabilities for accumulated benefits. Nevertheless, the IASB
indicates that the defined benefit obligation provides a more
realistic measure of the employer’s obligation under the plan
on a going concern basis. Therefore, companies should use it
as the basis for determining service cost.
The assignment of benefits to periods of service is based on the
actuarial valuation method. The actuary then allocates the cost of the
pension benefits over the expected service life of the company’s
employees. In determining the proper service cost for a period, the
actuary makes assumptions related to such factors as mortality; rates
of employee turnover, disability, and early retirement; discount rate;
benefit levels; and future salary levels. While IAS 19 does not require
use of an actuary, given the complexity of these estimates, just about
all companies rely on an actuary to determine service cost and related
other defined benefit measures.
Net Interest
In computing net interest, companies assume that the discount rate,
the net defined benefit obligation, and the pension asset are
determined at the beginning of the year.8 The discount rate is based
on the yields of high-quality bonds with terms consistent with the
company’s pension obligation. Net interest is then computed as
indicated in the following equation.
Net Interest = (Defined Benefit Obligation × Discount Rate)
− (Plan Assets × Discount Rate)

--- Page 1803 ---
That is, net interest is determined by multiplying the net defined
benefit obligation (asset) by the discount rate. [9]
Because payment of the pension obligation is deferred, companies
record the pension liability on a discounted basis. As a result, the
liability accrues interest over the service life of the employee (passage
of time), which is essentially interest expense (interest on the
liability). Similarly, companies earn a return on their plan assets.
That is, a company assumes that it earns interest based on multiplying
the discount rate by the plan assets. While the IASB recognizes that
the actual return on plan assets may differ from the assumed interest
revenue computed, it believes that the change in plan assets can be
divided into an amount that arises from the passage of time and
amounts that arise from other changes. As we discuss in the next
section, changes not related to the passage of time are reported in
other comprehensive income as remeasurements. Thus, the growth in
the plan assets should mirror the growth in the defined benefit
obligation. In other words, the assumed interest revenue on the plan
assets based on the passage of time offsets the interest expense on the
defined benefit obligation.
In summary, pension expense is comprised of two components: (1)
service cost and (2) net interest. Companies report each of these
components in the income statement. In some cases, companies may
choose to report these components in one section as a single amount
of total pension expense. Other companies may choose to report the
service cost component in operating income and the net interest in a
separate section related to financing.9
Plan Assets and Actual Return
Pension plan assets are usually investments in shares, bonds, other
securities, and real estate that a company holds to earn a reasonable
rate of return. Plan assets are reported at fair value. Companies
generally hold these assets in a separate legal entity (a pension fund)
that exists only to administer the employee benefit plan. These assets
held by the pension fund are therefore not available to the company’s
own creditors (even in bankruptcy). Employer contributions and the

--- Page 1804 ---
actual return on plan assets increase pension plan assets. Actual
return on plan assets is the increase in the pension fund assets
arising from interest, dividends, and realized and unrealized changes
in the fair value of the plan. Benefits paid to retired employees
decrease plan assets.
To illustrate, assume that Hasbro SA has pension plan assets of
€4,200,000 on January 1, 2022. During 2022, Hasbro contributed
€300,000 to the plan and paid out retirement benefits of €250,000.
Its actual return on plan assets was €210,000 for the year. Hasbro’s
plan assets at December 31, 2022, are €4,460,000, computed as
shown in Illustration 20.6.
Plan assets, January 1, 2022
€4,200,000
Contributions by Hasbro to plan
300,000
Actual return
210,000
Benefits paid to employees
(250,000)
Plan assets, December 31, 2022 €4,460,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.6 Determination of Pension Assets
In some cases, companies compute that actual return by adjusting the
change in plan assets for the effect of contributions during the year
and benefits paid during the year. The equation in Illustration 20.7,
or a variation thereof, can be used to compute the actual return.
Actual
Return =
(Plan Assets Ending Balance −
Plan Assets Beginning Balance) −
(Contributions
− Benefits
Paid)
ILLUSTRATION 20.7 Equation for Computing Actual
Return
Stated another way, the actual return on plan assets is the difference
between the fair value of the plan assets at the beginning of the period
and the end of the period, adjusted for contributions and benefit
payments. Illustration 20.8 uses the equation above to compute
actual return, using the information provided in Illustration 20.6.

--- Page 1805 ---
Plan assets, December 31, 2022
€4,460,000
Plan assets, January 1, 2022
(4,200,000)
Increase in fair value of plan assets
260,000
Deduct: Contributions to plan
€300,000
Add: Benefit payments to employees
250,000
(50,000)
Actual return
€ 210,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.8 Computation of Actual Return on
Plan Assets
In this case, Hasbro has a positive actual return on plan assets.
Recently, some pension plans have experienced negative actual
returns due to the increased volatility in global securities markets.
Using a Pension Worksheet
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Use a worksheet for employer’s pension plan entries.
We will now illustrate the basic computation of pension expense
using the first two components: (1) service cost and (2) net interest.
We discuss remeasurements in later sections.
Companies often use a worksheet to record pension-related
information. As its name suggests, the worksheet is a working tool. A
worksheet is not a permanent accounting record. It is neither a
journal nor part of the general ledger. The worksheet is merely a
device to make it easier to prepare entries and the financial
statements.10 Illustration 20.9 shows the format of the pension
worksheet.

--- Page 1806 ---
ILLUSTRATION 20.9 Basic Format of Pension Worksheet
The “General Journal Entries” columns of the worksheet (in the
center) determine the entries to record in the formal general ledger
accounts. The “Memo Record” columns (on the right side) maintain
balances in the defined benefit obligation and the plan assets. The
difference between the defined benefit obligation and the fair value of
the plan assets is the pension asset/liability, which is shown in the
statement of financial position. If the defined benefit obligation is
greater than the plan assets, a pension liability occurs. If the defined
benefit obligation is less than the plan assets, a pension asset occurs.
On the first line of the worksheet, a company enters the beginning
balances (if any).It then records subsequent transactions and events
related to the pension plan using debits and credits, using both sets of
columns as if they were one. For each transaction or event, the debits
must equal the credits. The ending balance in the Pension
Asset/Liability column should equal the net balance in the
memo record.
2022 Entries and Worksheet
To illustrate the use of a worksheet and how it helps in accounting for
a pension plan, assume that Zarle AG provides the following
information related to its pension plan for the year 2022.
Plan assets, January 1, 2022, are €100,000.
Defined benefit obligation, January 1, 2022, is €100,000.

--- Page 1807 ---
Annual service cost is €9,000.
Discount rate is 10 percent.
Funding contributions are €8,000.
Benefits paid to retirees during the year are €7,000.
Using these data, the worksheet in Illustration 20.10 presents the
beginning balances and all of the pension entries recorded by Zarle in
2022. Zarle records the beginning balances for the defined benefit
obligation and the pension plan assets on the first line of the
worksheet in the memo record. Because the defined benefit obligation
and the plan assets are the same at January 1, 2022, the Pension
Asset/Liability account has a zero balance at January 1, 2022.
ILLUSTRATION 20.10 Pension Worksheet—2022
Entry (a) in Illustration 20.10 records the service cost component,
which increases pension expense by €9,000 and increases the liability
(defined benefit obligation) by €9,000. Entry (b) accrues the interest
expense component, which increases both the liability and the
pension expense by €10,000 (the beginning defined benefit obligation

--- Page 1808 ---
multiplied by the discount rate of 10 percent). Entry (c) records the
interest revenue component, which increases plan assets and
decreases pension expense by €10,000. This is computed by
multiplying the beginning plan assets by the discount rate of 10
percent. As a result, interest expense (income) is zero in 2022. Entry
(d) records Zarle’s contribution (funding) of assets to the pension
fund, thereby decreasing cash by €8,000 and increasing plan assets by
€8,000. Entry (e) records the benefit payments made to retirees,
which results in equal €7,000 decreases to the plan assets and the
defined benefit obligation.
Zarle makes the “formal journal entry” on December 31, which
records the pension expense in 2022 as follows.
2022
Pension Expense
9,000
Cash
8,000
Pension Asset/Liability
1,000
Funded Status
The credit to Pension Asset/Liability for €1,000 represents the
difference between the 2022 pension expense of €9,000 and the
amount funded of €8,000. Pension Asset/Liability (credit) is a
liability because Zarle underfunds the plan by €1,000. The Pension
Asset/Liability account balance of €1,000 also equals the net of the
balances in the memo accounts. Illustration 20.11 shows that the
defined benefit obligation exceeds the plan assets by €1,000, which
reconciles to the pension liability reported in the statement of
financial position.
Defined benefit obligation (Credit) €(112,000)
Plan assets at fair value (Debit)
111,000
Pension asset/liability (Credit)
€
(1,000)
ILLUSTRATION 20.11 Pension Reconciliation Schedule—
December 31, 2022

--- Page 1809 ---
If the net of the memo record balances is a credit, the reconciling
amount in the Pension Asset/Liability column will be a credit equal in
amount. If the net of the memo record balances is a debit, the Pension
Asset/Liability amount will be a debit equal in amount. The worksheet
is designed to produce this reconciling feature, which is useful later in
the preparation of the financial statements and required note
disclosure related to pensions.
In this illustration (for 2022), the debit to Pension Expense exceeds
the credit to Cash, resulting in a credit to Pension Asset/Liability—the
recognition of a liability. If the credit to Cash exceeded the debit to
Pension Expense, Zarle would debit Pension Asset/Liability—the
recognition of an asset.11
Past Service Cost
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting for past service costs.
Past service cost (PSC) is the change in the present value of the
defined benefit obligation resulting from a plan amendment or a
curtailment.12 For example, a plan amendment arises when a company
decides to provide additional benefits to existing employees for past
service. Conversely, the company may decide that it is necessary to
reduce its benefit package retroactively for existing employees,
thereby reducing their pension benefit. A curtailment occurs when
the company has a significant reduction in the number of employees
covered by the plan. Because a curtailment has the same effect as a
reduction in benefits due to an amendment to the plan, these
situations are accounted for in the same way. Illustration 20.12
summarizes the nature of past service costs.

--- Page 1810 ---
Past Service Costs
(Expense in Current Period)
Plan
Amendments
Curtailments
Introduction
of a plan.
Withdrawal
of a plan.
Changes to a
plan.
Significant reduction in the number of
employees covered by the plan.
ILLUSTRATION 20.12 Types of Past Service Costs
The accounting for past service cost is straightforward—expense past
service cost in the period of the amendment or curtailment. As a
result, a substantial increase (decrease) in pension expense and the
defined benefit obligation often results when a plan amendment or
curtailment occurs. Because current and past service costs relate
directly to employment, they are reported in the operating section of
the statement of comprehensive income.
Some disagree with the IASB position of expensing these costs in the
year a plan is amended or curtailed. They argue that a company would
not provide these additional benefits for past years of service unless it
expects to receive benefits in the future. According to this reasoning, a
company should not recognize the full past service cost in the year of
the amendment. Instead, the past service cost should be spread out
over the remaining service life of employees who are expected to
benefit from the changes in the plan. Others believe that if they are
truly past service costs, they should be treated retroactively as an
adjustment made to prior periods.
However, the IASB decided that any changes in the defined benefit
obligation or plan assets should be recognized in the current period.

--- Page 1811 ---
To do otherwise is not informative and leads to delayed recognition of
costs or reduced benefits that are neither assets nor liabilities. [13]
It is also possible to decrease past service costs by decreasing the
defined benefit obligation (referred to as negative past service cost).
Negative past service cost arises when an entity changes the benefits
attributable to past service cost so that the present value of the
defined benefit obligation decreases. In that case, pension expense is
decreased. Both positive (increased pension expense) and negative
(decreased pension expense) past service cost adjustments are
handled in the same manner; that is, pension expense should be
adjusted immediately.
2023 Entries and Worksheet
Continuing the Zarle AG illustration into 2023, we note that the
company amends the pension plan on January 1, 2023, to grant
employees past service benefits with a present value of €81,600. The
following additional facts apply to the pension plan for the year 2023.
Annual service cost is €9,500.
Discount rate is 10 percent.
Annual funding contributions are €20,000.
Benefits paid to retirees during the year are €8,000.
Illustration 20.13 presents a worksheet of all the pension entries
and information recorded by Zarle in 2023.

--- Page 1812 ---
ILLUSTRATION 20.13 Pension Worksheet—2023
The first line of the worksheet shows the beginning balances of the
Pension Asset/Liability account and the memo accounts. Entry (f)
records Zarle’s granting of past service cost, by adding €81,600 to the
defined benefit obligation and to Pension Expense. Entry (g) records
the current service cost; entry (h) records interest expense for the
period. Because the past service cost occurred at the beginning of the
year, interest is computed on the January 1, 2023, balance of the
defined benefit obligation, adjusted for the past service cost. Interest
expense is therefore €19,360 (€193,600 × .10). Entry (i) records
interest revenue for the period of €11,100 (€111,000 × .10). Entries (j)
and (k) are similar to the corresponding entries in 2022.
Zarle makes the following journal entry on December 31 to formally
record the 2023 pension expense—the sum of the annual pension
expense column.
2023
Pension Expense
99,360
Cash
20,000
Pension Asset/Liability
79,360

--- Page 1813 ---
Because the expense exceeds the funding, Zarle credits the Pension
Asset/Liability account for the €79,360 difference. That account is a
liability. In 2023, as in 2022, the balance of the Pension
Asset/Liability account (€80,360) is equal to the net of the balances
in the memo accounts, as shown in Illustration 20.14.
Defined benefit obligation (Credit) €(214,460)
Plan assets at fair value (Debit)
134,100
Pension asset/liability (Credit)
€ (80,360)
ILLUSTRATION 20.14 Pension Reconciliation Schedule—
December 31, 2023
The reconciliation is the formula that makes the worksheet work. It
relates the components of pension accounting, recorded and
unrecorded, to one another.
Remeasurements
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Explain the accounting for remeasurements.
Of great concern to companies that have pension plans are the
uncontrollable and unexpected swings that can result from (1) sudden
and large changes in the fair value of plan assets and (2) changes in
actuarial assumptions that affect the amount of the defined benefit
obligation. How should these changes (referred to as
remeasurements) affect the financial statements, most notably
pension expense? The IASB believes that the most informative way is
to recognize the remeasurement in other comprehensive income. The
rationale for this reporting is that the predictive nature of
remeasurements is much different than the other two components of
pension benefit cost—service cost and net interest. [14]
Remeasurements are generally of two types:

--- Page 1814 ---
1. Gains and losses on plan assets.
2. Gains and losses on the defined benefit obligation.
Asset Gains and Losses
The gains and losses on plan assets (referred to as asset gains and
losses) represent the difference between the actual return and the
interest revenue computed in determining net interest. Asset gains
occur when actual returns exceed the interest revenue. Asset losses
occur when the actual returns are less than interest revenue. To
illustrate, assume that Shopbob SE has plan assets at January 1, 2022,
of €100,000. The discount rate for the year is 6 percent, and the actual
return on the plan assets for 2022 is €8,000. In 2022, Shopbob should
record an asset gain of €2,000, computed as shown in Illustration
20.15.
Actual return
€8,000
Less: Interest revenue (€100,000 × .06)
6,000
Asset gain
€2,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.15 Computation of Asset Gain
Shopbob therefore debits plan assets for the asset gain of €2,000 and
credits Other Comprehensive Income (G/L) for the same amount. If
interest revenue exceeds the actual return, Shopbob debits Other
Comprehensive Income (G/L) for the asset loss and credits plan
assets.
Liability Gains and Losses
In estimating the defined benefit obligation (the liability), actuaries
make assumptions about such items as mortality rate, retirement rate,
turnover rate, disability rate, and salary amounts. Any change in these
actuarial assumptions affects the amount of the defined benefit
obligation. Seldom does actual experience coincide exactly with
actuarial predictions. These gains or losses from changes in the
defined benefit obligation are called liability gains and losses.

--- Page 1815 ---
Companies report liability gains (resulting from unexpected decreases
in the liability balance) and liability losses (resulting from unexpected
increases in the liability balance) in Other Comprehensive Income
(G/L). Companies combine the liability gains and losses in the same
Other Comprehensive Income (G/L) account used for asset gains and
losses. They accumulate the asset and liability gains and losses from
year to year in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income.13 This
amount is reported on the statement of financial position in the
equity section.
2024 Entries and Worksheet
Continuing the Zarle illustration, the following facts apply to the
pension plan for 2024.
Annual service cost is €13,000.
Discount rate is 10 percent.
Actual return on plan assets is €12,000.
Annual funding contributions are €24,000.
Benefits paid to retirees during the year are €10,500.
Changes in actuarial assumptions establish the end-of-year
defined benefit obligation at €265,000.
The worksheet in Illustration 20.16 presents all of Zarle’s 2024
pension entries and related information. The first line of the
worksheet records the beginning balances that relate to the pension
plan. In this case, Zarle’s beginning balances are the ending balances
from its 2023 pension worksheet in Illustration 20.13.

--- Page 1816 ---
ILLUSTRATION 20.16 Pension Worksheet—2024
Entries (l), (m), (n), (o), and (p) are similar to the corresponding
entries in 2022 or 2023. Entries (m) and (n) are related. Entry (m)
records the interest expense of €21,446 (€214,460 × .10). Entry (n)
records interest revenue of €13,410 (€134,100 × .10). Therefore, net
interest expense is €8,036 (€21,446 − €13,410.) In 2024, entries (o)
and (p) are recorded similarly to those in 2022 and 2023.
Entries (q) and (r) need additional explanation. As indicated, the
actual return on plan assets for 2024 was €12,000. However, as
indicated in entry (n), pension expense was decreased €13,410 as a
result of multiplying the beginning plan assets by the discount rate to
arrive at an assumed interest revenue of €13,410. As a result, Zarle
has an asset loss of €1,410 (€13,410 − €12,000) because the assumed
interest revenue is greater than the actual return. This asset loss is
debited to Other Comprehensive Income (G/L) and credited to plan
assets. Pension plan assets are then properly stated at their fair value.
Entry (r) records the change in the defined benefit obligation resulting
from the changes in the actuarial assumptions related to this
obligation. As indicated in the facts above, the actuary has determined
that the ending balance in the defined benefit obligation should be
€265,000 at December 31, 2024. However, the balance at December

--- Page 1817 ---
31, 2024, before any adjustment for actuarial gains and losses related
to the defined benefit obligation is €238,406, as shown in
Illustration 20.17.
December 31, 2023, DBO balance
€214,460
Service cost [entry (l)]
13,000
Interest expense [entry (m)]
21,446
Benefits paid
(10,500)
December 31, 2024, DBO balance (before liability
increases)
238,406
Liability Loss
26,594
December 31, 2024, DBO balance
€265,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.17 Defined Benefit Obligation Balance
The difference between the ending balance of €265,000 as determined
by the actuary and the present balance of €238,406 is €26,594 (a
liability loss on the defined benefit liability). As shown on the
worksheet, this liability loss is debited to Other Comprehensive
Income (G/L) and credited to the defined benefit obligation. After this
worksheet adjustment, the defined benefit obligation is stated at its
actuarial value of €265,000. The journal entry to record the
information related to the pension plan at December 31, 2024, based
on the pension worksheet in Illustration 20.16, is as follows.
Pension Expense
21,036
Other Comprehensive Income (G/L) 28,004
Cash
24,000
Pension Asset/Liability
25,040
As the 2024 worksheet indicates, the €105,400 balance in the Pension
Asset/Liability account at December 31, 2024, is equal to the net of
the balances in the memo accounts. Illustration 20.18 shows this
computation.

--- Page 1818 ---
Defined benefit obligation (Credit) €(265,000)
Plan assets at fair value (Debit)
159,600
Pension asset/liability
€(105,400)
ILLUSTRATION 20.18 Pension Reconciliation Schedule—
December 31, 2024
Zarle carries the 2024 ending balances for Pension Asset/Liability and
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income forward as the beginning
balances for pension plan accounting in 2025. These balances will be
adjusted by changes in the defined benefit obligation and plan assets
as shown in the prior examples. For example, assume that Zarle’s
pension plan had the following activity in 2025:
Pension expense
€17,450
Contributions
32,000
Asset gain
13,150
Decrease in Pension Asset/Liability
27,700
The ending balances for the defined benefit obligation and plan assets
are €303,560 and €225,860, respectively. These elements are
summarized in the partial 2025 pension worksheet shown in
Illustration 20.19.
ILLUSTRATION 20.19 Partial Pension Worksheet—2025

--- Page 1819 ---
Focusing on the “Journal entry” row, in 2025 Zarle records pension
expense of €17,450 and a decrease in Pension Asset/Liability of
€27,700. The reduction in Pension Asset/Liability is due in part to the
asset gain of €13,150 recorded in 2025. As a result, Zarle’s 2025
ending balances (which become the 2026 beginning balances) are
Pension Asset/Liability €77,700 and Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income €14,854 (beginning Accumulated OCI of
€28,004 − gain of €13,150).

--- Page 1820 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Roller Coaster
The following chart shows what has happened to the financial
health of pension plans over the last few years. It is a real roller
coaster.
As discussed in the opening story, the funded status of pension
plans took a dramatic fall from an over-funded status in 2007 to
persistent under-funded status in the years since the financial
crisis. The future is highly uncertain, with continued stagnant
bond returns and the yet-to-be-determined market effects of Brexit
and the Covid-19 pandemic.
A number of factors cause a fund to change from being overfunded
to underfunded. First, low interest rates decimate returns on
pension plan assets. As a result, pension fund assets have not
grown; in some cases, they have declined in value. Second, using
low interest rates to discount the projected benefit payments leads
to a higher pension liability. Finally, more individuals are retiring,
which leads to a depletion of the pension plan assets.
Sources: D. Zion and A. Varshay, “Strong Returns Didn’t Close Pension Funding
Gaps Last Year; But So Far So Good This Year,” Credit Suisse Equity Research
(February 5, 2013); V. Monga, “Longer Lives Cut Premium to Offload Pensions,” Wall

--- Page 1821 ---
Street Journal (February 3, 2015); and T.W. Martin, V. Monda, and H. Gillers, “Brexit
Adds to Pension Funds’ Pain,” Wall Street Journal (July 10, 2016).
Reporting Pension Plans in Financial
Statements
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Describe the requirements for reporting pension plans in financial
statements.
As you might suspect, a phenomenon as significant and complex as
pensions involves extensive reporting and disclosure requirements.
We will cover these requirements in two categories: (1) those within
the financial statements and (2) those within the notes to the
financial statements.
Within the Financial Statements
Pension Expense
As indicated earlier, pension expense (service cost and net interest)
affects net income and is reported in the statement of comprehensive
income. Companies may choose to report these components in one
section of the statement of comprehensive income and report total
pension expense. Other companies may choose to report the service
cost component in operating income and the net interest in a separate
section related to financing.14
Gains and Losses (Remeasurements)
Asset and liability gains and losses are recognized in other
comprehensive income. By recognizing these gains and losses as part
of other comprehensive income but not net income, the Board
believes that the usefulness of financial statements is enhanced.

--- Page 1822 ---
To illustrate the presentation of other comprehensive income and
related accumulated OCI, assume that Obey ASA provides the
following information for the year 2022.
Net income for 2022
€100,000
Liability loss for 2022
60,000
Asset loss for 2022
15,000
Accumulated OCI, January 1, 2022
40,000
Both the liability loss and the asset loss decrease the funded status of
the plan on the statement of financial position. This results because
the defined benefit obligation increases and the plan assets decrease.
However, neither the liability loss nor the asset loss affects pension
expense in 2022.
For Obey, the computation of “Other comprehensive loss” for 2022 is
as shown in Illustration 20.20.
Liability loss
€60,000
Asset loss
15,000
Other comprehensive loss €75,000
ILLUSTRATION 
20.20 
Computation 
of 
Other
Comprehensive Income
Illustration 20.21 shows the computation of “Comprehensive
income” for 2022.
Net income
€100,000
Other comprehensive loss
75,000
Comprehensive income
€ 25,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.21 Computation of Comprehensive
Income
The components of other comprehensive income must be reported
using one of two formats: (1) a two statement approach or (2) a one
statement approach (a combined statement of comprehensive

--- Page 1823 ---
income). Regardless of the format used, net income must be added to
other comprehensive income to arrive at comprehensive income. For
homework purposes, use the two statement approach unless stated
otherwise. Earnings per share information related to comprehensive
income is not required.
To illustrate the two statement approach, assume that Obey has
reported a traditional income statement. The comprehensive income
statement is shown in Illustration 20.22.
Obey ASA 
Comprehensive Income Statement 
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net income
€100,000
Other comprehensive loss
Liability loss
€60,000
Asset loss
15,000
75,000
Comprehensive income
€ 25,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.22 Comprehensive Income Reporting
The computation of “Accumulated other comprehensive income” as
reported in equity at December 31, 2022, is shown in Illustration
20.23.
Accumulated other comprehensive income, January 1, 2022 €40,000
Other comprehensive loss
75,000
Accumulated other comprehensive loss, December 31, 2022 €35,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.23 Computation of Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
Regardless of the display format for the income statement, the
accumulated other comprehensive loss is reported in the equity
section of the statement of financial position of Obey ASA as shown in
Illustration 20.24, which uses assumed data for the share capital—
ordinary and retained earnings information.)

--- Page 1824 ---
Obey ASA 
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
(Equity Section)
Equity
Share capital—ordinary
€100,000
Retained earnings
60,000
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
35,000
Total equity
€125,000
ILLUSTRATION 20.24 Reporting of Accumulated OCI
By providing information on the components of comprehensive
income as well as total accumulated other comprehensive income, the
company reports all changes in net assets.
The IASB prohibits recycling of pension-related other comprehensive
income items. Recycling means that other comprehensive income
items are reclassified (through amortization) to net income over a
period of time. Recycling, for example, is used under U.S. GAAP. The
IASB notes that it is difficult to establish a reasonable basis for
making these transfers. [16] In addition, not adjusting these amounts
over time into net income signals that these items have characteristics
different than normal revenues and expenses.
Recognition of the Net Funded Status of the Pension Plan
Companies must recognize on their statement of financial position
the overfunded (pension asset) or underfunded (pension liability)
status of their defined benefit pension plan. The overfunded or
underfunded status is measured as the difference between the fair
value of the plan assets and the defined benefit obligation.
When a pension plan is overfunded (when there is a pension asset),
the amount reported in the statement of financial position is
constrained. The IASB decided that the amount reported should be
either the lower of the pension asset (plan assets less the defined
benefit obligation), or the asset ceiling. The asset ceiling is the

--- Page 1825 ---
portion of the pension asset that the employer is eligible to receive
back from the plan in the form of refunds or reductions in future
contributions. For homework purposes, assume that the pension plan
asset reported in the statement of financial position is not
constrained by the asset ceiling.
Classification of Pension Asset or Pension Liability
The IASB does not indicate whether a company should distinguish
current and non-current portions of assets and liabilities arising from
pension benefits. For homework purposes, assume that no portion of
a pension asset is reported as a current asset. The excess of the fair
value of the plan assets over the defined benefit obligation is classified
as a non-current asset. The rationale for non-current classification is
that the pension plan assets are restricted. That is, these assets are
used to fund the defined benefit obligation, and therefore non-current
classification is appropriate.
The current portion of a net pension liability represents the amount of
benefit payments to be paid in the next 12 months (or operating cycle,
if longer) if that amount cannot be funded from existing plan assets.
Otherwise, the pension liability is classified as a non-current liability.
Aggregation of Pension Plans
Some companies have two or more pension plans. In such instances, a
question arises as to whether these multiple plans should be
combined and shown as one amount on the statement of financial
position. The Board takes the position that in general pension plans
should not be combined. The only situation in which offsetting is
permitted is when a company:
a. Has a legally enforceable right to use a surplus in one plan to
settle obligations in the other plan, and
b. Intends either to settle the obligation on a net basis, or to realize
the surplus in one plan and settle its obligations under the other
plan simultaneously.

--- Page 1826 ---
Within the Notes to the Financial Statements
Information on pension plans is important in understanding a
company’s financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. To
better understand a pension plan, a company is required to disclose
information that: [17]
a. Explains characteristics of its defined benefit plans and risks
associated with them.
b. Identifies and explains the amounts in its financial statements
arising from its defined benefit plans.
c. Describes how its defined benefit plans may affect the amount,
timing, and uncertainty of the company’s future cash flows.
To meet these requirements, companies provide extensive disclosures
related to their defined benefit plans (see Underlying Concepts).
We focus our discussion on the second objective, which requires
identifying and explaining the amounts in financial statements arising
from defined pension plans. These requirements are summarized in
Illustration 20.25.
Underlying Concepts
This represents another compromise between relevance and
faithful representation. Disclosure is used to balance these
objectives.

--- Page 1827 ---
Amounts reported in the financial statements:
Companies should provide reconciliation from the beginning balance
to the ending balance for each of the following:
1. Plan assets.
2. Defined benefit obligation.
3. Funded status of the plan.
This reconciliation should report the following, where appropriate.
Current service cost.
Interest revenue or expense.
Remeasurements of the net defined benefit liability (asset)
showing separately (a) the return on plan assets, excluding
amounts of interest revenue computed in (2); and (b) actuarial
gains and losses arising from changes in the defined benefit
obligation.
Past service cost and curtailments.
Contributions and payments to the plan.
Information on how the defined benefit plan may affect the
amount, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows:
1. Sensitivity analysis for each significant actuarial assumption,
showing how the defined benefit obligation would have been
affected by changes in the relevant actuarial assumption that
were reasonably possible at the reporting date.
2. Methods and assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity
analyses required by (1) and the limitations of those methods.
3. Changes from the previous period in the methods and
assumptions used in preparing the sensitivity analyses and the
reasons for such changes.

--- Page 1828 ---
4. Description of any funding arrangements and funding policy that
affect future contributions.
5. Expected contributions to the plan for the next annual reporting
period.
6. Information about the maturity profile of the defined benefit
obligation, including information about the distribution of the
timing of benefit payments, such as a maturity analysis of the
benefit payments.
ILLUSTRATION 20.25 Pension Disclosure Requirements
The reconciliation is a key element of the pension disclosure package.
By having a reconciliation of the changes in the assets and liabilities
from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, statement
readers can better understand the underlying economics of the plan.
In essence, this disclosure contains the information in the pension
worksheet for the defined benefit obligation and plan asset columns
in accordance with IAS 19 requirements. Using the information for
Zarle presented earlier in the chapter, the schedule in Illustration
20.26 provides an example of the reconciliation.

--- Page 1829 ---
Zarle AG 
Pension Disclosure
2022
2023
2024
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at beginning of
year
€100,000
€112,000
€ 214,460
Service cost
9,000
9,500
13,000
Interest expense
10,000
19,360
21,446
Amendments (Past service cost)
0
81,600
0
Benefits paid
(7,000)
(8,000)
(10,500)
Actuarial loss
0
0
26,594
Benefit obligation at end of year
(112,000)
(214,460)
(265,000)
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at
beginning of year
100,000
111,000
134,100
Interest revenue
10,000
11,100
13,410
Contributions
8,000
20,000
24,000
Benefits paid
(7,000)
(8,000)
(10,500)
Asset loss
0
0
(1,410)
Fair value of plan assets at end of
year
111,000
134,100
159,600
Funded status (Pension
asset/liability)
€ (1,000) € (80,360) €(105,400)
ILLUSTRATION 20.26 Pension Disclosure for Zarle AG—
2022, 2023, 2024
The 2022 column reveals that Zarle underfunds the defined benefit
obligation by €1,000. The 2023 column reveals that Zarle reports the
underfunded liability of €80,360 in the statement of financial
position. Finally, the 2024 column indicates that Zarle recognizes the

--- Page 1830 ---
underfunded liability of €105,400 in the statement of financial
position.
Other Postretirement Benefits
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Explain the accounting for other postretirement benefits.
In addition to pensions, companies often promise other types of
postretirement benefits. The benefits include life insurance outside a
pension plan; medical, dental, and eye care; legal and tax services; and
so on. Because healthcare benefits are the largest of other
postretirement benefits, we provide a general description of how they
differ from traditional pension plans in Illustration 20.27.
Item
Pensions
Healthcare Benefits
Funding
Generally funded.
Generally not funded.
Benefit
Well-defined and
level dollar
amount.
Generally uncapped and great
variability.
Beneficiary
Retiree (maybe
some benefit to
surviving spouse).
Retiree, spouse, and other
dependents.
Benefit
payable
Monthly.
As needed and used.
Predictability Variables are
reasonably
predictable.
Utilization difficult to predict.
Level of cost varies geographically
and fluctuates over time.
ILLUSTRATION 20.27 Differences between Pensions and
Postretirement Healthcare Benefits
Two of the differences in Illustration 20.27 highlight why measuring
the future payments is so much more difficult for healthcare benefit
plans than for pension plans.

--- Page 1831 ---
1. Many postretirement plans do not set a limit on
healthcare benefits. No matter how serious the illness or how
long it lasts, the benefits continue to flow. (Even if the employer
uses an insurance company plan, the premiums will escalate
according to the increased benefits provided.)
2. The levels of healthcare benefit use and healthcare costs
are difficult to predict. Increased longevity, unexpected
illnesses (e.g., AIDS, H1N1 flu, and COVID-19), along with new
medical technologies and cures, cause changes in healthcare
utilization and costs.
Additionally, although the fiduciary and reporting standards for
employee benefit funds under government regulations generally cover
healthcare benefits, the stringent minimum vesting, participation, and
funding standards that apply to pensions do not apply to healthcare
benefits. Nevertheless, the basic concepts of pension accounting apply
to other postretirement benefits. As a result, the IASB indicates that
the accounting and reporting of these other types of postretirement
benefits should be the same as that used for pension plan reporting
(except for substituting “Postretirement” for “Pension” in related
account titles). However, companies with both pension and other
postretirement benefit plans must separately disclose the plan details
when the plans are subject to materially different risks. [18]
Concluding Observations
Hardly a day goes by without the financial press analyzing in depth
some issue related to pension plans around the world. This is not
surprising, since pension funds now hold trillions of dollars, euros,
pounds, and yen in assets. As you have seen, the accounting issues
related to pension plans are complex. Recent amendments to IAS 19,
as discussed in this chapter, have clarified many of these issues and
should help users understand the financial implications of a
company’s pension plans on its financial position, results of
operations, and cash flows.

--- Page 1832 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
How’s Your Volatility?
Companies were not required to adopt the changes arising from
the amendments to IAS 19 until 2013. In the period leading up to
adoption, many were analyzing the impact on financial statements
and the implications for users of financial statements. The
following table summarizes some of the key accounting impacts
and their consequences—some good, some bad.
Accounting/Financial Reporting
Impact
Consequences of the
Changes
Potentially higher pension expense
due to use of a single (usually lower)
discount rate to determine return on
assets (interest revenue) and
recognition of all past service costs in
net income.
Could lead to violation of
loan covenants or
decreased bonus
payments for
performance plans based
on net income.
Increased volatility in statement
of financial position and
shareholders’ equity due to
recognition of all remeasurements in
other comprehensive income.
Could lead to violation of
loan covenants based on
shareholders’ equity and
affect regulatory
oversight based on share
capital.
Reduced net income volatility for
companies that previously recognized
all gains and losses in net income.
Companies may realize
lower cost of capital
because less volatility is
associated with lower
risk.
The reduced net income volatility could be a significant benefit
when companies adopt the new rules. For example, the following
chart indicates that if the new rules had been applied in the years
1998–2009 (black line), changes in net income would have been
less volatile, compared to net income changes reported under the

--- Page 1833 ---
prior rules (red line). Change can be painful. However, in this case
the modification in the new rules will likely result in less net
income volatility.
Not surprisingly, the biggest differences in income under the new
and old rules emerge in periods of market decline (e.g., 2000–
2002 and 2007–2008). In more stable market periods, there is
expected to be minimal difference in reported pension expense.
For example, in 2012 Roche Group (CHE) indicated that the
effect on income would be CHF164 million, or just 1 percent of
operating profits. The company expected the ongoing impact for
2013 and beyond to be of a similar magnitude.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accumulated benefit obligation
actual return on plan assets
actuarial present value (n)

--- Page 1834 ---
actuaries
asset ceiling
asset gains and losses
benefits/years-of-service method
components of pension cost
contributory pension plan
curtailment
defined benefit obligation
defined benefit plan
defined contribution plan
discount rate
funded pension plan
funded status
interest on the liability (interest expense)
liability gains and losses
net defined benefit obligation (asset)
non-contributory pension plan
past service cost (PSC)
pension asset/liability
pension plan
pension worksheet
plan assets
projected unit credit method (benefits/ years-of-service method)
qualified pension plan
reconciliation
remeasurements

--- Page 1835 ---
service cost
settlement (n)
vested benefit obligation
vested benefits
Learning Objectives Review
1 Discuss the fundamentals of pension plan accounting.
The company or employer is the organization sponsoring the pension
plan. It incurs the cost and makes contributions to the pension fund.
The fund or plan is the entity that receives the contributions from the
employer, administers the pension assets, and makes the benefit
payments to the pension recipients (retired employees). The fund
should be a separate legal and accounting entity; it maintains a set of
books and prepares financial statements.
Types of pension plans. The two most common types of pension
arrangements are as follows. (1) Defined contribution plans: The
employer agrees to contribute to a pension trust a certain sum each
period based on a formula. This formula may consider such factors as
age, length of employee service, employer’s profits, and compensation
level. Only the employer’s contribution is defined; no promise is made
regarding the ultimate benefits paid out to the employees. (2) Defined
benefit plans: These plans define the benefits that the employee will
receive at the time of retirement. The formula typically provides for
the benefits to be a function of years of service and the compensation
level when the employee nears retirement.
Valuing the pension obligation. One measure bases the pension
obligation only on the benefits vested to the employees. Vested
benefits are those that the employee is entitled to receive even if he or
she renders no additional services under the plan. Companies
compute the vested benefits pension obligation using current salary
levels; this obligation includes only vested benefits. Another measure
of the obligation, called the accumulated benefit obligation, computes

--- Page 1836 ---
the deferred compensation amount based on all years of service
performed by employees under the plan—both vested and non-vested
—using current salary levels. A third measure, called the defined
benefit obligation, bases the computation of the deferred
compensation amount on both vested and non-vested service using
future salaries.
Identify amounts reported. In the statement of financial position,
companies report the net defined benefit obligation/asset (funded
status), which is the defined benefit obligation less the fair value of
plan assets (if any). Changes in the net defined benefit obligation
(asset) are reported in comprehensive income. Service cost (current
and past) and net interest (computed by multiplying the discount rate
by the funded status of the plan) are reported in the operating section
of the income statement. Remeasurements are gains and losses
related to the defined benefit obligation (changes in discount rate or
other actuarial assumptions) and gains or losses on the fair value of
the plan assets. Remeasurements are reported in other
comprehensive income.
2 Use a worksheet for employer’s pension plan entries.
Companies may use a worksheet unique to pension accounting. This
worksheet records both the formal entries and the memo entries to
keep track of all the employer’s relevant pension plan items and
components.
3 Explain the accounting for past service costs.
Past service cost is the change in the value of the defined benefit
obligation resulting from a plan amendment or a curtailment. Past
service costs are expensed in the period of the amendment or
curtailment. As a result, a substantial increase (decrease) in pension
expense and the defined benefit obligation often results when a plan
amendment or curtailment occurs.

--- Page 1837 ---
4 Explain the accounting for remeasurements.
Remeasurements arise from (1) gains and losses on plan assets and
(2) gains and losses on the defined benefit obligation. The gains and
losses on plan assets (asset gain or loss) represent the difference
between the actual return and the interest revenue computed in
determining net interest. Asset gains occur when actual returns
exceed the interest revenue. Asset losses occur when the actual
returns are less than interest revenue. The gains or losses on the
defined benefit obligation (liability gain/loss) are due to changes in
actuarial assumptions that affect the amount of the defined benefit
obligation. All remeasurements are reported in other comprehensive
income. These amounts are not recycled into income in subsequent
periods.
5 Describe the requirements for reporting pension plans
in financial statements.
A company reports the pension asset/liability as an asset or a liability
in the statement of financial position at the end of a reporting period.
The classification as non-current or current follows the general
guidelines used for classification of other assets or liabilities. On the
income statement (or related notes), the company must report the
amount of pension expense for the period. In addition, any actuarial
gains or losses charged or credited to other comprehensive income
should be reported in the statement of comprehensive income.
In the notes, a company is required to disclose information that: (a)
explains characteristics of its defined benefit plans and risks
associated with them, (b) identifies and explains the amounts in its
financial statements arising from its defined benefit plans, and (c)
describes how its defined benefit plans may affect the amount, timing,
and uncertainty of the company’s future cash flows. Important note
disclosures are summarized in Illustration 20.25. The reconciliation of
the changes in the pension assets and liabilities is a key element of
the pension disclosure package.

--- Page 1838 ---
6 Explain the accounting for other postretirement
benefits.
Companies often provide other types of non-pension postretirement
benefits, such as life insurance outside a pension plan, medical care,
and legal and tax services. The accounting for these other types of
postretirement benefits is the same as that used for pension plan
reporting. Companies with both pension and other postretirement
benefit plans must separately disclose the plan details when the plans
are subject to materially different risks.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review
exercises with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Jablonski plc sponsors a defined benefit pension plan for its
employees. On January 1, 2022, the following balances related to
this plan.
Plan assets
₤170,000
Projected benefit obligation
240,000
Pension asset/liability
70,000 Cr.
OCI—Loss
11,000
As a result of the operation of the plan during 2022, the actuary
provided the following additional data at December 31, 2022.
Service cost for 2022
₤45,000
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
17,000
Contribution in 2022
85,000
Benefits paid retirees in 2022
10,500

--- Page 1839 ---
Discount rate
7%
Changes in actuarial assumptions result in a defined benefit
obligation end-of-year balance of $335,000.
Instructions
a. Compute pension expense for Jablonski for the year 2022 by
preparing a pension worksheet that shows the journal entry for
pension expense.
b. Indicate the pension amounts reported in the financial
statements.
Solution
a. 
2022
Pension Expense
49,900
Other Comprehensive Income (G/L) 38,600
Pension Asset/Liability
3,500
Cash
85,000

--- Page 1840 ---
b. The pension amounts reported in the 2022 financial statements
are as follows.
Income Statement
Pension expense
₤49,900
Comprehensive Income Statement
Net income
₤XXXX
Other comprehensive income
Asset gain
₤ 5,100
Liability loss
43,700
38,600
Comprehensive income
₤XXXX
Statement of Financial Position
Equity
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(G/L)
₤
49,600
Liabilities
Pension liability
₤
73,500
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and
resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. What is a pension plan? How does a contributory pension plan
differ from a non-contributory plan?
2. Differentiate between a defined contribution pension plan and a
defined benefit pension plan. Explain how the employer’s obligation
differs between the two types of plans.
3. Differentiate between “accounting for the employer” and
“accounting for the pension fund.”

--- Page 1841 ---
4. The meaning of the term “fund” depends on the context in which it
is used. Explain its meaning when used as a noun. Explain its
meaning when used as a verb.
5. What is the role of an actuary relative to pension plans? What are
actuarial assumptions?
6. What factors must be considered by the actuary in measuring the
amount of pension benefits under a defined benefit plan?
7. Name three approaches to measuring benefits from a pension plan
and explain how they differ.
8. Explain how cash-basis accounting for pension plans differs from
accrual-basis accounting for pension plans. Why is cash-basis
accounting generally considered unacceptable for pension plan
accounting?
9. What is the net benefit obligation (asset)? How is the net benefit
obligation (asset) reported in the financial statements?
10. What elements comprise changes in the net benefit obligation
(asset)? How are these changes reported in the financial statements?
11. Identify the components of pension expense. Briefly explain the
nature of each component.
12. What is service cost, and what is the basis of its measurement?
13. What is net interest? Identify the elements of net interest and
explain how they are computed.
14. Given the following items and amounts, compute the actual
return on plan assets: fair value of plan assets at the beginning of the
period $9,200,000; benefits paid during the period $1,400,000;
contributions made during the period $1,000,000; and fair value of
the plan assets at the end of the period $10,150,000.
15. Explain the difference between service cost and past service cost.
16. What is meant by “past service cost”? When is past service cost
recognized as pension expense?

--- Page 1842 ---
17. What is a pension plan curtailment? Explain the accounting for
pension plan curtailments.
18. Sarah is a finance major who has taken only one accounting
course. She asserts that pension remeasurements, like many other
accounting adjustments, are recorded in net income. Is Sarah correct?
Explain.
19. How does an “asset gain or loss” develop in pension accounting?
20. What are “liability gains and losses,” and how are they accounted
for?
21. If pension expense recognized in a period exceeds the current
amount funded by the employer, what kind of account arises, and how
should it be reported in the financial statements? If the reverse occurs
—that is, current funding by the employer exceeds the amount
recognized as pension expense—what kind of account arises, and how
should it be reported?
22. Bill Haley is learning about pension accounting. He is convinced
that in years when companies record liability gains and losses, total
comprehensive income will not be affected. Is Bill correct? Explain.
23. At the end of the current period, Jacob AG has a defined benefit
obligation of €125,000 and pension plan assets with a fair value of
€98,000. The amount of the vested benefits for the plan is €95,000.
What amount and account(s) related to its pension plan will be
reported on the company’s statement of financial position?
24. At the end of the current year, Joshua plc has a defined benefit
obligation of £335,000 and pension plan assets with a fair value of
£345,000. The amount of the vested benefits for the plan is £225,000.
Joshua has a liability gain of £8,300. What amount and account(s)
related to its pension plan will be reported on the company’s
statement of financial position?
25. Explain the meaning of the following terms.
a. Contributory plan.
b. Vested benefits.

--- Page 1843 ---
c. Retroactive benefits.
26. Of what value to the financial statement reader is the schedule
reconciling the funded status of the plan with amounts reported in the
employer’s statement of financial position?
27. What are postretirement benefits other than pensions?
28. What are the major differences between postretirement
healthcare benefits and pension benefits?
Brief Exercises
BE20.1 (LO 2) Assume that Cathay Pacific Airlines (HKG)
reported the following in a recent annual report (in millions).
Service cost
HK$316
Interest on defined benefit obligation
342
Interest revenue on plan assets
371
Compute Cathay Pacific’s pension expense.
BE20.2 (LO 2) For Becker AG, year-end plan assets were
€2,000,000. At the beginning of the year, plan assets were
€1,680,000. During the year, contributions to the pension fund were
€120,000, and benefits paid were €200,000. Compute Becker’s actual
return on plan assets.
BE20.3 (LO 2) At January 1, 2022, Uddin Company had plan assets
of $250,000 and a defined benefit obligation of the same amount.
During 2022, service cost was $27,500, the discount rate was 10%,
actual return on plan assets was $25,000, contributions were
$20,000, and benefits paid were $17,500. Prepare a pension
worksheet for Uddin Company for 2022.
BE20.4 (LO 2) For 2022, assume that Wm Morrison
Supermarkets plc (GBR) had pension expense of £61 million and
contributed £52 million to the pension fund. Prepare Morrison’s
journal entry to record pension income and funding.

--- Page 1844 ---
BE20.5 (LO 2) Duesbury Corporation amended its pension plan on
January 1, 2022, and granted $120,000 of past service costs to its
employees. The employees have an average time to vesting of 4 years.
Current service cost for 2022 is $23,000, and net interest expense is
$8,000. Compute pension expense for Duesbury in 2022.
BE20.6 (LO 2, 4) Villa SpA has experienced tough competition,
leading it to seek concessions from its employees in the company’s
pension plan. In exchange for promises to avoid layoffs and wage cuts,
the employees agreed to receive lower pension benefits in the future.
As a result, Villa amended its pension plan on January 1, 2022, and
recorded negative past service cost of €125,000. The average period to
vesting for the benefits affected by this plan is 5 years. Current service
cost for 2022 is €26,000. Interest expense is €9,000, and interest
revenue is €2,500. Actual return on assets in 2022 is €1,500. Compute
pension expense for Villa in 2022.
BE20.7 (LO 4) Refer to the information for Villa SpA in BE20.6.
Compute the gain or loss on pension plan assets for Villa SpA and
indicate the accounting and reporting for the asset gains or losses.
BE20.8 (LO 2, 4, 5) Hemera SA had a defined benefit obligation of
R$3,100,000 and plan assets of R$2,900,000 at January 1, 2022.
Hemera’s discount rate is 6%. In 2022, actual return on plan assets is
R$160,000. Hemera contributed R$200,000 to the pension fund and
paid benefits of R$150,000. Service cost for 2022 is R$50,000;
Hemera reports that the defined benefit obligation at December 31,
2022, is R$3,600,000. Determine (a) pension expense for 2022; (b)
pension assets at December 31, 2022; and (c) pension asset and
liability gains and losses. Indicate how pension gains and losses will
be reported by Hemera in the statement of comprehensive income
and the statement of financial position.
BE20.9 (LO 5) Tevez AG experienced an actuarial loss of €750 in its
defined benefit plan in 2022. For 2022, Tevez’s revenues are
€125,000, and expenses (excluding pension expense of €14,000) are
€85,000. Prepare Tevez’s statement of comprehensive income for
2022.

--- Page 1845 ---
BE20.10 (LO 5) At December 31, 2022, Conway SA had a defined
benefit obligation of €510,000 and plan assets of €322,000. Prepare a
pension reconciliation schedule for Conway.
BE20.11 (LO 6) Caleb Corporation has the following information
available concerning its postretirement medical benefit plan for 2022.
Service cost
$40,000
Interest expense
52,400
Interest revenue
26,900
Compute Caleb’s 2022 postretirement expense.
BE20.12 (LO 6) For 2022, Benjamin plc computed its annual
postretirement expense as £240,900. Benjamin’s contribution to the
plan during 2022 was £160,000. Prepare Benjamin’s 2022 entry to
record postretirement expense.
Exercises
E20.1 (LO 1) (Pension Expense, Journal Entry) The following
information is available for the pension plan of Radcliffe Company for
the year 2022.
Interest revenue on plan assets
$ 15,000
Benefits paid to retirees
40,000
Contributions (funding)
90,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Defined benefit obligation, January 1, 2022 500,000
Service cost
60,000
Instructions
a. Compute pension expense for the year 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record pension expense and the
employer’s contribution to the pension plan in 2022.

--- Page 1846 ---
E20.2 (LO 1) (Computation of Pension Expense) Veldre SpA
provides the following information about its defined benefit pension
plan for the year 2022.
Service cost
€ 90,000
Contribution to the plan
105,000
Benefits paid
40,000
Plan assets at January 1, 2022
640,000
Defined benefit obligation at January 1, 2022 700,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Instructions
Compute the pension expense for the year 2022.
E20.3 (LO 2) (Preparation of Pension Worksheet) Using the
information in E20.2, prepare a pension worksheet inserting the
January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2022, balances, and the journal
entry recording pension expense.
E20.4 (LO 2) (Basic Pension Worksheet) The following facts
apply to the pension plan of Boudreau plc for the year 2022.
Plan assets, January 1, 2022
£490,000
Defined benefit obligation, January 1, 2022
490,000
Discount (interest) rate
8%
Service cost
40,000
Contributions (funding)
25,000
Actual return on plan assets
39,200
Benefits paid to retirees
33,400
Instructions
Using the preceding data, compute pension expense for the year 2022.
As part of your solution, prepare a pension worksheet that shows the
journal entry for pension expense for 2022 and the year-end balances
in the related pension accounts.

--- Page 1847 ---
E20.5 (LO 1) (Computation of Actual Return, Asset Gain and
Loss) Gingrich Importers provides the following pension plan
information.
Fair value of pension plan assets, January 1, 2022
2,400,000
Fair value of pension plan assets, December 31, 2022
2,725,000
Contributions to the plan in 2022
280,000
Benefits paid retirees in 2022
350,000
Discount (interest) rate
7%
Instructions
a. From the data above, compute the actual return on the plan
assets for 2022.
b. Compute asset gain or loss, and indicate how the gain or loss will
be reported.
E20.6 (LO 2, 3) (Basic Pension Worksheet, Past Service
Costs) The following defined pension data of Yang Ltd. apply to the
year 2022 (amounts in thousands).
Defined benefit obligation, 1/1/22 (before amendment)
¥560,000
Plan assets, 1/1/22
546,200
Pension liability
13,800
On January 1, 2022, Yang Ltd., through plan amendment,
grants past service benefits having a present value of
120,000
Discount (interest) rate
9%
Service cost
58,000
Contributions (funding)
65,000
Actual return on plan assets
49,158
Benefits paid to retirees
40,000
Instructions

--- Page 1848 ---
For 2022, prepare a pension worksheet for Yang Ltd. that shows the
journal entry for pension expense and the year-end balances in the
related pension accounts.
E20.7 (LO 2, 4, 5) (Pension Worksheet, Gains and Losses)
Kennedy Company had a defined benefit obligation of $6,300,000 and
plan assets of $4,900,000 at January 1, 2022. Kennedy has the
following data related to the plan during 2022.
Discount (interest) rate
7%
Service cost
$120,000
Actual return on plan assets
295,000
Contributions
400,000
Benefits paid
300,000
Defined benefit obligation at December 31, 2022, is $6,650,000. There
are no accumulated gains or losses at December 31, 2021.
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet for Kennedy Company for 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record 2022 pension expense.
c. Indicate how pension gains and losses (if any) will be reported by
Kennedy in the statement of comprehensive income and the
statement of financial position.
E20.8 (LO 2, 4, 5) (Disclosures: Pension Expense and Other
Comprehensive Income) Taveras Enterprises provides the
following information related to its defined benefit pension plan.
Balances or Values at December 31, 2022
Defined benefit obligation
€2,729,907
Fair value of plan assets
2,278,329
Accumulated OCI—Net loss (1/1/22 balance, –0–)
1,700
Other pension plan data:

--- Page 1849 ---
Service cost for 2022
94,000
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
130,000
Interest on January 1, 2022, defined benefit obligation
157,127
Contributions to plan in 2022
93,329
Benefits paid
140,000
Discount (interest) rate
6%
Instructions
a. Prepare the note disclosing the components of pension expense
for the year 2022.
b. Determine the amounts of other comprehensive income and
comprehensive income for 2022. Net income for 2022 is €35,000.
c. Compute the amount of accumulated other comprehensive
income reported at December 31, 2022.
E20.9 (LO 2, 4) (Pension Worksheet and Remeasurement)
Webb Corp. sponsors a defined benefit pension plan for its employees.
On January 1, 2022, the following balances relate to this plan.
Plan assets
$480,000
Defined benefit obligation
600,000
Pension asset/liability
120,000
Accumulated OCI
–0–
As a result of the operation of the plan during 2022, the following
additional data are provided by the actuary.
Service cost for 2022
$90,000
Discount (interest) rate
6%
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
55,000
Unexpected loss from change in defined benefit obligation,
due to change in actuarial predictions
76,000
Contributions in 2022
99,000

--- Page 1850 ---
Benefits paid retirees in 2022
85,000
Instructions
a. Using the data above, compute pension expense for Webb Corp.
for the year 2022 by preparing a pension worksheet.
b. Prepare the journal entry for pension expense for 2022.
E20.10 (LO 1, 4, 5) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries,
Statement Presentation) Henning plc sponsors a defined benefit
pension plan for its employees. The following data relate to the
operation of the plan for the year 2022.
1. The actuarial present value of future benefits earned by
employees for services rendered in 2022 amounted to £56,000.
2. The company’s funding policy requires a contribution to the
pension trustee amounting to £145,000 for 2022.
3. As of January 1, 2022, the company had a defined benefit
obligation of £900,000, an accumulated benefit obligation of
£800,000, and a balance of £40,000 in accumulated OCI (Loss).
The fair value of pension plan assets amounted to £600,000 at
the beginning of the year. The discount rate was 9%. Actual return
on plan assets was £60,000, and no benefits were paid.
Instructions
a. Determine the amounts of the components of pension expense
that should be recognized by the company in 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record pension expense
and the employer’s contribution to the pension trustee in 2022.
c. Indicate the amounts that would be reported on the income
statement and the statement of financial position for the year
2022.
E20.11 (LO 1, 2, 4, 5) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries,
Statement Presentation) Ferreri SpA received the following

--- Page 1851 ---
selected information from its pension plan trustee concerning the
operation of the company’s defined benefit pension plan for the year
ended December 31, 2022.
January 1,
2022
December 31,
2022
Defined benefit obligation
€1,500,000
€1,527,000
Fair value of plan assets
800,000
1,130,000
Accumulated benefit obligation
1,600,000
1,720,000
Accumulated OCI (G/L)—Net gain
–0–
200,000
The service cost component of pension expense for employee services
rendered in the current year amounted to €77,000. The company’s
actual funding of the plan (contributions) in 2022 amounted to
€250,000. The discount (interest) rate was 10%. Assume no benefits
paid in 2022.
Instructions
a. Determine the amounts of the components of pension expense
that should be recognized by the company in 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record pension expense and the
employer’s contribution to the pension plan in 2022.
c. Indicate the pension-related amounts that would be reported on
the income statement and the statement of financial position for
Ferreri SpA for the year 2022.
E20.12 (LO 1, 4, 5) (Computation of Actual Return, Gains and
Losses, and Pension Expense) Erickson plc sponsors a defined
benefit pension plan. The company’s actuary provides the following
information about the plan.
January 1,
2022
December 31, 
2022
Vested benefit obligation
£1,500
£1,900
Accumulated benefit obligation
1,900
2,730

--- Page 1852 ---
Defined benefit obligation
2,500
3,300
Plan assets (fair value)
1,700
2,620
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Pension liability
800
?
Service cost for the year 2022
400
Contributions (funding in 2022)
700
Benefits paid in 2022
200
Instructions
a. Compute the actual return on the plan assets in 2022.
b. Compute the amount of net gain or loss for 2022.
c. Compute the amount of the other comprehensive income (G/L)
as of December 31, 2022. (Assume the January 1, 2022, balance
was zero.)
E20.13 (LO 2, 4, 5) (Worksheet for E20.12) Using the
information in E20.12 about Erickson plc’s defined benefit pension
plan, prepare a 2022 pension worksheet with supplementary
schedules of computations. Prepare the journal entries at December
31, 2022, to record pension expense and related pension transactions.
Also, indicate the pension amounts reported in the statement of
financial position.
E20.14 (LO 2, 5) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries) Latoya
Company provides the following selected information related to its
defined benefit pension plan for 2022.
Pension asset/liability (January 1)
$ 25,000 Cr.
Accumulated benefit obligation (December 31) 400,000
Actual return on plan assets
67,500
Contributions (funding) in 2022
50,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Defined benefit obligation (January 1)
700,000

--- Page 1853 ---
Service cost
80,000
Instructions
a. Compute pension expense and prepare the journal entry to record
pension expense and the employer’s contribution to the pension
plan in 2022. Preparation of a pension worksheet is not required.
Benefits paid in 2022 were $35,000.
b. Indicate the pension-related amounts that would be reported in
the company’s statement of comprehensive income and
statement of financial position for 2022.
E20.15 (LO 2, 5) (Pension Worksheet—Missing Amounts) The
accounting staff of Usher Inc. has prepared the following pension
worksheet (amounts in $). Unfortunately, several entries in the
worksheet are not decipherable. The company has asked for your
assistance in completing the worksheet and the accounting tasks
related to the pension plan for 2022.
Instructions
a. Determine the missing amounts in the 2022 pension worksheet,
indicating whether the amounts are debits or credits.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record 2022 pension expense for
Usher Inc.

--- Page 1854 ---
E20.16 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Expense
Computation) Kreter Concepts provides the following information
about its postretirement benefit plan for the year 2022.
Service cost
 45,000
Contribution to the plan
10,000
Actual return on plan assets (at 8%)
8,800
Benefits paid
20,000
Plan assets at January 1, 2022
110,000
Defined postretirement benefit obligation at January 1,
2022
330,000
Discount (interest) rate
8%
Instructions
Compute the postretirement benefit expense for 2022.
E20.17 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Worksheet) Using the
information in E20.16, prepare a worksheet inserting January 1, 2022,
balances, and showing December 31, 2022, balances. Prepare the
journal entry recording postretirement benefit expense.

--- Page 1855 ---
E20.18 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Expense
Computation) Garner Inc. provides the following information
related to its postretirement benefits for the year 2022.
Defined postretirement benefit obligation at January 1,
2022
$710,000
Actual return on plan assets (at 10%)
34,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Service cost
83,000
Instructions
Compute postretirement benefit expense for 2022.
E20.19 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Expense
Computation) Englehart AG provides the following information
about its postretirement benefit plan for the year 2022.
Service cost
€ 90,000
Contribution to the plan
56,000
Actual return on plan assets
62,000
Benefits paid
40,000
Plan assets at January 1, 2022
710,000
Defined postretirement benefit obligation at January 1,
2022
760,000
Accumulated OCI (Loss) at January 1, 2022
100 Dr.
Discount (interest) rate
9%
Instructions
Compute the postretirement benefit expense for 2022.
E20.20 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Worksheet) Using the
information in E20.19, prepare a worksheet inserting the January 1,
2022, and December 31, 2022, balances, and the journal entry
recording postretirement benefit expense.

--- Page 1856 ---
E20.21 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Worksheet—Missing
Amounts) The accounting staff of Holder Inc. has prepared the
following postretirement benefit worksheet (amounts in €).
Unfortunately, several entries in the worksheet are not decipherable.
The company has asked your assistance in completing the worksheet
and completing the accounting tasks related to the pension plan for
2022.
Instructions
a. Determine the missing amounts in the 2022 postretirement
worksheet, indicating whether the amounts are debits or credits.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record 2022 postretirement expense
for Holder Inc.
c. What discount rate is Holder using in accounting for the interest
on its other postretirement benefit plan? Explain.
Problems
P20.1 (LO 2, 4, 5) (2-Year Worksheet) On January 1, 2022,
Harrington SA has the following defined benefit pension plan
balances.

--- Page 1857 ---
Defined benefit obligation €4,500,000
Fair value of plan assets
4,200,000
The interest rate applicable to the plan is 10%. On January 1, 2023, the
company amends its pension agreement so that past service costs of
€500,000 are created. Other data related to the pension plan are as
follows.
2022
2023
Service cost
€150,000 €180,000
Contributions (funding) to the plan
240,000
285,000
Benefits paid
200,000
280,000
Actual return on plan assets
420,000
260,000
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet for the pension plan for 2022 and
2023.
b. For 2023, prepare the journal entry to record pension-related
amounts.
P20.2 (LO 2, 3, 4, 5) 
 (3-Year Worksheet, Journal
Entries, and Reporting) Jackson Company adopts acceptable
accounting for its defined benefit pension plan on January 1, 2021,
with the following beginning balances: plan assets $200,000 and
defined benefit obligation $250,000. Other data relating to 3 years’
operation of the plan are shown below.
2021
2022
2023
Annual service cost
$16,000 $19,000 $26,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
10%
10%
Actual return on plan assets
20,000
22,000
24,000
Annual funding (contributions)
16,000 40,000
48,000
Benefits paid
14,000
16,400
21,000
Past service cost (plan amended, 1/1/22)
160,000

--- Page 1858 ---
Change in actuarial assumptions
establishes a December 31, 2023, defined
benefit obligation of:
520,000
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet presenting all 3 years’ pension
balances and activities.
b. Prepare the journal entries (from the worksheet) to reflect all
pension plan transactions and events at December 31 of each
year.
c. Indicate the pension-related amounts reported in the financial
statements for 2023.
P20.3 (LO 3, 4, 5) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries)
Gottschalk plc sponsors a defined benefit plan for its 100 employees.
On January 1, 2022, the company’s actuary provided the following
information.
Pension plan assets (fair value) £200,000
Accumulated benefit obligation
260,000
Defined benefit obligation
380,000
The average remaining service period for the participating employees
is 10 years. All employees are expected to receive benefits under the
plan. On December 31, 2022, the actuary calculated that the present
value of future benefits earned for employee services rendered in the
current year amounted to £52,000; the defined benefit obligation was
£490,000, the fair value of pension assets was £276,000, and the
accumulated benefit obligation amounted to £365,000. The discount
(interest) rate is 10%. The actual return on plan assets is £11,000. The
company’s current year’s contribution to the pension plan amounted
to £65,000. No benefits were paid during the year.
Instructions

--- Page 1859 ---
a. Determine the components of pension expense that the company
would recognize in 2022. (With only one year involved, you need
not prepare a worksheet.)
b. Prepare the journal entry to record the pension expense and the
company’s funding of the pension plan in 2022.
c. Compute the amount of the 2022 increase/decrease in gains or
losses.
d. Indicate the pension amounts reported in the financial
statements for 2022.
P20.4 (LO 2, 4) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries for 2
Years) Gordon Company sponsors a defined benefit pension plan.
The following information related to the pension plan is available for
2022 and 2023 (no benefits were paid in either year).
2022
2023
Plan assets (fair value), December 31
$699,000
$849,000
Defined benefit obligation, January 1
700,000
800,000
Pension asset/liability, January 1
140,000 Cr.
?
Service cost
60,000
90,000
Actual return on plan assets
24,000
30,000
Contributions (funding)
115,000
120,000
Accumulated benefit obligation, December
31
500,000
550,000
Discount (interest) rate
9%
9%
Instructions
a. Compute pension expense for 2022 and 2023.
b. Prepare the journal entries to record the pension expense and the
company’s funding of the pension plan for both years.
P20.5 (LO 4) (Computation of Pension Expense, Journal
Entries for 3 Years) Hiatt Toothpaste SA initiates a defined benefit

--- Page 1860 ---
pension plan for its 50 employees on January 1, 2022. The insurance
company which administers the pension plan provided the following
selected information for the years 2022, 2023, and 2024.
For Year Ended December
31,
2022
2023
2024
Plan assets (fair value)
€50,000 € 85,000 €180,000
Vested benefit obligation
45,000
165,000
292,000
Defined benefit obligation
60,000 200,000
324,000
Net (gain) loss
–0–
78,900
5,800
Employer’s funding contribution
(made at end of year)
50,000
60,000
105,000
There were no balances as of January 1, 2022, when the plan was
initiated. The actual return on plan assets was 10% over the 3-year
period, but the discount (interest) rate was 13% in 2022, 11% in 2023,
and 8% in 2024. The service cost component of net periodic pension
expense amounted to the following: 2022, €60,000; 2023, €85,000;
and 2024, €119,000. No benefits were paid in 2022, €30,000 of
benefits were paid in 2023, and €18,500 of benefits were paid in 2024
(all benefits paid at end of year).
Instructions
(Round to the nearest euro.)
a. Calculate the amount of net periodic pension expense that the
company would recognize in 2022, 2023, and 2024.
b. Prepare the journal entries to record net periodic pension
expense, employer’s funding contribution, and related pension
amounts for the years 2022, 2023, and 2024.
P20.6 (LO 1, 4) (Pension Expense, Journal Entries, and Net
Gain or Loss) Aykroyd Inc. has sponsored a non-contributory,
defined benefit pension plan for its employees since 1992. Relevant
information about the pension plan on January 1, 2022, is as follows.

--- Page 1861 ---
1. The company has 200 employees. All these employees are
expected to receive benefits under the plan.
2. The defined benefit obligation amounted to $5,000,000, and the
fair value of pension plan assets was $3,000,000. There is a zero
balance in Accumulated Other Compensive Income related to the
pension.
On December 31, 2022, the defined benefit obligation and the vested
benefit obligation were $4,850,000 and $4,025,000, respectively. The
fair value of the pension plan assets amounted to $4,100,000 at the
end of the year. A 10% discount rate was used in the actuarial present
value computations in the pension plan. The present value of benefits
attributed by the pension benefit formula to employee service in 2022
amounted to $200,000. The employer’s contribution to the plan
assets amounted to $775,000 in 2022. This problem assumes no
payment of pension benefits.
Instructions
(Round all amounts to the nearest dollar.)
a. Compute pension expense for the year 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entries required to report the accounting for
the company’s pension plan for 2022.
c. Compute the amount of the increase/decrease in net gains or
losses in 2022.
P20.7 (LO 2, 4) (Pension Worksheet) Hanson Ltd. sponsors a
defined benefit pension plan for its employees. On January 1, 2022,
the following balances related to this plan.
Plan assets (fair value)
£520,000
Defined benefit obligation
700,000
Pension asset/liability
180,000 Cr.
Accumulated net loss
91,000

--- Page 1862 ---
As a result of the operation of the plan during 2022, the actuary
provided the following additional data on December 31, 2022.
Service cost for 2022
£108,000
Discount (interest) rate
9%
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
48,000
Contributions in 2022
133,000
Benefits paid retirees in 2022
85,000
Instructions
Using the preceding data, compute pension expense for Hanson Ltd.
for the year 2022 by preparing a pension worksheet that shows the
journal entry for pension expense.
P20.8 (LO 2, 4, 5) 
 (Comprehensive 2-Year
Worksheet) Lemke SA sponsors a defined benefit pension plan for
its employees. The following data relate to the operation of the plan
for the years 2022 and 2023.
2022
2023
Defined benefit obligation, January 1
R600,000
Plan assets (fair value), January 1
410,000
Pension asset/liability, January 1
190,000 Cr.
Service cost
40,000
R
59,000
Discount (interest) rate
10%
10%
Actual return on plan assets
36,000
61,000
Annual contributions
97,000
81,000
Benefits paid retirees
31,500
54,000
Increase in defined benefit obligation due to
changes in actuarial assumptions
87,000
–0–
Accumulated benefit obligation at December
31
721,800
789,000

--- Page 1863 ---
Vested benefit obligation at December 31
464,000
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet for both 2022 and 2023.
b. Prepare the journal entries (from the worksheet) to reflect all
pension plan transactions and events at December 31 of each
year.
c. For 2023, indicate the pension amounts reported in the financial
statements.
P20.9 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 (Comprehensive 2-Year
Worksheet) Hobbs AG has the following defined benefit pension
plan balances on January 1, 2022.
Defined benefit obligation €4,600,000
Fair value of plan assets
4,600,000
The discount (interest) rate applicable to the plan is 10%. On January
1, 2023, the company amends its pension agreement so that past
service costs of €600,000 are created. Other data related to the
pension plan are as follows.
2022
2023
Service cost
€150,000 €170,000
Contributions (funding) to the plan
200,000
184,658
Benefits paid
220,000 280,000
Actual return on plan assets
252,000
350,000
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet for the pension plan in 2022.
b. Prepare any journal entries related to the pension plan that would
be needed at December 31, 2022.
c. Prepare a pension worksheet for 2023 and any journal entries
related to the pension plan as of December 31, 2023.

--- Page 1864 ---
d. Indicate the pension-related amounts reported in the 2023
financial statements.
P20.10 (LO 2, 4) (Pension Worksheet—Missing Amounts)
Kramer Co. has prepared the following pension worksheet (amounts
in $). Unfortunately, several entries in the worksheet are not
decipherable. The company has asked your assistance in completing
both the worksheet and the accounting tasks related to the pension
plan for 2022.
Instructions
a. Determine the missing amounts in Kramer’s 2022 pension
worksheet, indicating whether the amounts are debits or credits.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record 2022 pension expense.
c. Determine for 2022 the discount rate used to determine interest
expense/revenue.
P20.11 (LO 2, 4, 5) (Pension Worksheet) The following data
relate to the operation of Kramer Co.’s pension plan in 2023. The
pension worksheet for 2022 is provided in P20.10.

--- Page 1865 ---
Service cost
$59,000
Actual return on plan assets
32,000
Annual contributions
51,000
Benefits paid retirees
27,000
For 2023, Kramer will use a discount rate of 8%.
Instructions
a. Prepare a pension worksheet for 2023.
b. Prepare the journal entries (from the worksheet) to reflect all
pension plan transactions and events at December 31.
c. Indicate the pension amounts reported in the financial
statements.
P20.12 (LO 2, 4, 5) (Pension Worksheet) Chen Group sponsors a
defined benefit pension plan for its employees. On January 1, 2022,
the following balances related to this plan (amounts in thousands).
Plan assets (fair value)
¥270,000
Defined benefit obligation
340,000
Pension asset/liability
70,000 Cr.
OCI—Loss
39,000
As a result of the operation of the plan during 2022, the actuary
provided the following additional data at December 31, 2022.
Service cost for 2022
¥45,000
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
27,000
Contributions in 2022
65,000
Benefits paid retirees in 2022
41,000
Discount (interest) rate
7%
Instructions

--- Page 1866 ---
a. Compute pension expense for Chen Group for the year 2022 by
preparing a pension worksheet that shows the journal entry for
pension expense.
b. Indicate the pension amounts reported in the financial
statements.
P20.13 (LO 6) 
 (Postretirement Benefit Worksheet)
Hollenbeck Foods Inc. sponsors a postretirement medical and dental
benefit plan for its employees. The following balances relate to this
plan on January 1, 2022.
Plan assets
$200,000
Defined postretirement benefit obligation
200,000
As a result of the plan’s operation during 2022, the following
additional data are provided by the actuary.
Service cost for 2022 is $70,000
Discount (interest) rate is 10%
Contributions to plan in 2022 are $65,000
Actual return on plan assets is $15,000
Benefits paid to employees are $44,000
Instructions
a. Using the preceding data, compute the net periodic
postretirement benefit cost for 2022 by preparing a worksheet
that shows the journal entry for postretirement expense and the
year-end balances in the related postretirement benefit memo
accounts. (Assume that contributions and benefits are paid at the
end of the year.)
b. Prepare any journal entries related to the postretirement plan for
2022 and indicate the postretirement amounts reported in the
financial statements for 2022.

--- Page 1867 ---
P20.14 (LO 6) (Postretirement Benefit Worksheet—2 Years)
Elton AG has the following postretirement benefit plan balances on
January 1, 2022.
Defined postretirement benefit obligation €2,250,000
Fair value of plan assets
2,250,000
The discount (interest) rate applicable to the plan is 10%. On January
1, 2023, the company amends the plan so that past service costs of
€175,000 are created. Other data related to the plan are as follows.
2022
2023
Service costs
€ 75,000 € 85,000
Contributions (funding) to the plan
45,000
35,000
Benefits paid
40,000
45,000
Actual return on plan assets
140,000 120,000
Instructions
a. Prepare a worksheet for the postretirement plan in 2022.
b. Prepare any journal entries related to the postretirement plan
that would be needed at December 31, 2022.
c. Prepare a worksheet for 2023 and any journal entries related to
the postretirement plan as of December 31, 2023.
d. Indicate the postretirement-benefit–related amounts reported in
the 2023 financial statements.
Concepts for Analysis
CA20.1 (LO 1) (Pension Terminology and Theory) Since the
late 1800s, many business organizations have been concerned with
providing for the retirement of their employees. During recent
decades, a marked increase in this concern has resulted in the
establishment of pension plans in most large companies and in many
medium- and small-sized ones.

--- Page 1868 ---
The substantial growth of these plans, both in numbers of employees
covered and in amounts of retirement benefits, has increased the
significance of pension cost in relation to the financial position,
results of operations, and cash flows of many companies. In
examining the costs of pension plans, a public accountant encounters
certain terms. The components of pension costs that the terms
represent must be dealt with appropriately if IFRS is to be reflected in
the financial statements of entities with pension plans.
Instructions
a. Define a pension plan. How does a contributory pension plan
differ from a non-contributory plan?
b. Differentiate between “accounting for the employer” and
“accounting for the pension fund.”
c. Explain the terms “funded” and “pension liability” as they relate
to:
1. The pension fund.
2. The employer.
d. 
1. Discuss the theoretical justification for accrual recognition of
pension costs.
2. Discuss the relative objectivity of the measurement process
of accrual versus cash (pay-as-you-go) accounting for annual
pension costs.
e. Distinguish among the following as they relate to pension plans.
1. Service cost.
2. Past service costs.
3. Vested benefits.
CA20.2 (LO 1) 
 (Pension Terminology) The following
items commonly appear in a company’s financial statements.
1. Under the caption Assets:

--- Page 1869 ---
Pension asset/liability.
2. Under the caption Liabilities:
Pension asset/liability.
3. Under the caption Equity:
Asset loss as a component of Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income.
4. On the income statement:
Pension expense.
Instructions
Explain the significance of each of the items above on company
financial statements. (Note: Not all the items listed above are
necessarily found on the statements of a single company.)
CA20.3 (LO 1) (Basic Terminology) In examining the costs of
pension plans, Leah Hutcherson, public accountant, encounters
certain terms. The components of pension costs that the terms
represent must be dealt with appropriately if IFRS is to be reflected in
the financial statements of entities with pension plans.
Instructions
a. 
1. Explain the application of accrual concepts to recognition of
pension costs.
2. Discuss the relative verifiability and neutrality of the
measurement process of accrual versus cash (pay-as-you-go)
accounting for annual pension costs.
b. Explain the following terms as they apply to accounting for
pension plans.
1. Defined benefit obligation.
2. Net interest.
c. What information should be disclosed about a company’s pension
plans in its financial statements and its notes?

--- Page 1870 ---
CA20.4 (LO 1) 
 (Major Pension Concepts) Lyons plc is a
medium-sized manufacturer of paperboard containers and boxes. The
company sponsors a non-contributory, defined benefit pension plan
that covers its 250 employees. Tim Shea has recently been hired as
president of Lyons plc. While reviewing last year’s financial
statements with Anita Kroll, controller, Shea expressed confusion
about several of the items in the footnote to the financial statements
relating to the pension plan. In part, the footnote reads as follows.
Note J. The company has a defined benefit pension plan
covering substantially all of its employees. The benefits are based
on years of service and the employee’s compensation during the
last four years of employment. The company’s funding policy is to
contribute annually the maximum amount allowed under the tax
law. Contributions are intended to provide for benefits expected
to be earned in the future as well as those earned to date.
The net periodic pension expense on Lyons plc’s comparative income
statement was £72,000 in 2023 and £57,680 in 2022.
The following are selected figures from the plan’s funded status and
amounts recognized in the Lyons plc’s statement of financial position
at December 31, 2023 (amounts in thousands).
Defined benefit obligation
£(1,200)
Plan assets at fair value
1,050
Defined benefit obligation in excess of plan assets £
(150)
Given that Lyons plc’s workforce has been stable for the last 6 years,
Shea could not understand the increase in the net periodic pension
expense. Kroll explained that the net periodic pension expense
consists of several elements, some of which may increase or decrease
the net expense.
Instructions
a. The determination of the net periodic pension expense is a
function of two elements. List and briefly describe each of the
elements.

--- Page 1871 ---
b. Describe the major difference and the major similarity between
the vested benefit obligation and the defined benefit obligation.
c. 
1. Explain why pension gains and losses are not recognized in
net income in the period in which they arise.
2. Briefly describe how pension gains and losses are recognized.
CA20.5 (LO 1) 
 (Implications of International
Accounting Standard No. 19) Ruth Moore and Carl Nies have to
do a class presentation on the pension pronouncement “Employee
Benefits.” In developing the class presentation, they decided to
provide the class with a series of questions related to pensions and
then discuss the answers in class. Given that the class has read IAS 19,
they felt this approach would provide a lively discussion. Here are the
situations:
1. In an article prior to the recent amendments to IAS 19, it was
reported that the discount rates used by the largest 200
companies for pension reporting ranged from 5% to 11%. How can
such a situation exist, and does the pension pronouncement
alleviate this problem?
2. An article indicated that when IAS 19 was issued, it caused an
increase in the liability for pensions for a significant number of
companies. Why might this situation occur?
3. A recent article noted that most gains and losses are recognized in
net income. However, pension accounting has long been
recognized as an exception—an area of accounting in which at
least some dampening of market swings is appropriate. This is
because pension funds are managed so that their performance is
insulated from the extremes of short-term market swings. A
pension expense that reflects the volatility of market swings
might, for that reason, convey information of little relevance. Are
these statements true?
4. Many companies held assets twice as large as they needed to fund
their pension plans at one time. Are these assets reported on the

--- Page 1872 ---
statement of financial position of these companies per the
pension pronouncement? If not, where are they reported?
5. Understanding the impact of the changes required in pension
reporting requires detailed information about a company’s
pension plan(s) and an analysis of the relationship of many
factors, particularly:
a. The type of plan(s) and any significant amendments.
b. The plan participants.
c. The funding status.
d. The actuarial funding method and assumptions currently
used.
What impact does each of these items have on financial
statement presentation?
Instructions
What answers do you believe Ruth and Carl gave to each of these
questions?
CA20.6 (LO 1, 3, 4) 
 (Non-Vested Employees—An
Ethical Dilemma) Cardinal Technology recently merged with
College Electronix (CE), a computer graphics manufacturing firm. In
performing a comprehensive audit of CE’s accounting system, Richard
Nye, internal audit manager for Cardinal Technology, discovered that
the new subsidiary did not capitalize pension assets and liabilities,
subject to the requirements of IFRS.
The fair value of CE’s pension assets was $15.5 million, the vested
benefit obligation was $12.9 million, and the defined benefit
obligation was $17.4 million. Nye reported this audit finding to Renée
Selma, the newly appointed controller of CE. A few days later, Selma
called Nye for his advice on what to do. Selma started her
conversation by asking, “Can’t we eliminate the negative income effect
of our pension dilemma simply by terminating the employment of
non-vested employees before the end of our fiscal year?”

--- Page 1873 ---
Instructions
How should Nye respond to Selma’s remark about firing non-vested
employees?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A.
The company’s complete annual report, including the notes to the
financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to
answer the following questions.
a. What kind of pension plan does M&S provide its employees?
b. What was M&S’s pension expense for 2019 and 2018?
c. What is the impact of M&S’s pension plans for 2019 on its
financial statements?
d. What information does M&S provide on the target allocation of
its pension assets? How do the allocations relate to the expected
returns on these assets?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are
presented in Appendices B and C, respectively. The complete annual
reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.
Instructions

--- Page 1874 ---
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following
questions related to adidas and Puma.
a. What kind of pension plans do adidas and Puma provide their
employees?
b. What net periodic pension expense (cost) did adidas and Puma
report in 2018?
c. What is the year-end 2018 funded status of adidas’s and Puma’s
plans?
d. What relevant rates were used by adidas and Puma in computing
their pension amounts?
e. Compare the benefit payments and contributions for adidas and
Puma.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
PENCOMP AG’s statement of financial position at December 31, 2021,
is as follows.
PENCOMP AG
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2021
Assets
Equity
Plant and
equipment
€2,000
Share capital
€2,000
Accumulated
depreciation
(240)
Retained
earnings
896
1,760 Total equity
2,896
Inventory
€ 1,800
Liabilities
Cash
438
Notes payable
€ 1,000
Total current
assets
2,238
Pension liability
102

--- Page 1875 ---
PENCOMP AG
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2021
Total assets
€3,998
Total
liabilities
1,102
Total equity
and liabilities
€3,998
Additional information concerning PENCOMP’s defined benefit
pension plan follows.
Defined benefit obligation at 12/31/21
€ 820.5
Plan assets (fair value) at 12/31/21
718.5
Service cost for 2022
42.0
Discount (interest) rate
10%
Actual return on plan assets in 2022
60.6
Contributions to pension fund in 2022
70.0
Benefits paid during 2022
40.0
Accumulated OCI (net loss due to changes in actuarial
assumptions and deferred net losses on plan assets) at
12/31/21; included in retained earnings balance
92.0
Other information about PENCOMP is as follows.
Salary expense, all paid with cash during 2022 €  700.0
Sales, all for cash
3,000.0
Purchases, all for cash
2,000.0
Inventory at 12/31/2022
1,800.0
Property originally cost €2,000 and is depreciated on a straight-line
basis over 25 years with no residual value.
Interest on the note payable is 10% annually and is paid in cash on
12/31 of each year.
Dividends declared and paid are €200 in 2022.

--- Page 1876 ---
Accounting
Prepare an income statement for 2022 and a statement of financial
position as of December 31, 2022. Also, prepare the pension expense
journal entry for the year ended December 31, 2022. (Round to two
decimal places.)
Analysis
Compute return on equity for PENCOMP for 2022 (assume average
equity is equal to year-end equity). Do you think an argument can be
made for including some or even all of the asset/liability gains and
losses in the numerator of return on equity? Illustrate that
calculation.
Principles
Explain a rationale for why the IASB has (so far) decided to exclude
from the current-period income statement the effects of gains and
losses due to changes in actuarial assumptions.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 26, Accounting and Reporting
by Retirement Benefit Plans (London, U.K.: International Accounting
Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[2] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), paras. 50–54.
[3] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 59.
[4] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 8.

--- Page 1877 ---
[5] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), paras. 83–86.
[6] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments:
Presentation (London, U.K.: IASB Foundation, 2003), par. 42.
[7] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), paras. BC70–71 and BC89–90.
[8] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 123.
[9] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), paras. 123–124.
[10] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 134.
[11] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 64; and IFRIC Interpretation 14, IAS 19—The
Limit on a Defined Benefit Asset, Minimum Funding Requirements
and Their Interaction (2007).
[12] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. BC163.
[13] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. BC70.
[14] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. BC90.

--- Page 1878 ---
[15] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 121.
[16] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. BC99.
[17] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), paras. 135–144.
[18] International Accounting Standard 19, Employee Benefits
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2011), par. 138.
Research Case
Jack Kelly Company has grown rapidly since its founding in 2006. To
instill loyalty in its employees, Kelly is contemplating establishment
of a defined benefit plan. Kelly knows that lenders and potential
investors will pay close attention to the impact of the pension plan on
the company’s financial statements, particularly any gains or losses
that develop in the plan. Kelly has asked you to conduct some
research on the accounting for gains and losses in a defined benefit
plan.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may
register for free IFRS access at this site). When you have accessed the
documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet browser to
respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Briefly describe how pension gains and losses are accounted for.
b. Explain the rationale behind the accounting method described in
part (a).
c. What is the related pension asset or liability that may show up on
the statement of financial position? When will each of these

--- Page 1879 ---
situations occur?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7
Compare the accounting for pensions under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
The underlying concepts for the accounting for postretirement
benefits are similar in U.S. GAAP and IFRS—both U.S. GAAP and IFRS
view pensions and other postretirement benefits as forms of deferred
compensation. At present, there are significant differences in the
specific accounting provisions applied to these plans.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP
and IFRS related to pensions.
Similarities
U.S. GAAP and IFRS separate pension plans into defined
contribution plans and defined benefit plans. The accounting for
defined contribution plans is similar.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS recognize the merit of reporting the
primary components of pension expense (service cost and net
interest) in different sections of the income statement.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS recognize a pension asset or liability as the
funded status of the plan (i.e., defined benefit obligation minus
the fair value of plan assets). (Note that defined benefit obligation
is referred to as the projected benefit obligation in U.S. GAAP.)
U.S. GAAP and IFRS compute unrecognized past service cost
(PSC) (referred to as prior service cost in U.S. GAAP) in the same
manner.
Differences

--- Page 1880 ---
While both U.S. GAAP and IFRS include interest expense on the
liability in pension expense, GAAP subtracts an asset return
component based on expected return. Under IFRS for asset
returns, pension expense is reduced by the amount of interest
revenue. Other changes in asset value remeasurements are
recorded in other comprehensive income.
U.S. GAAP amortizes PSC over the remaining service lives of
employees, while IFRS recognizes PSC as a component of pension
expense in income immediately.
While IFRS permits the primary components of pension expense
(service cost and net interest) to be reported in different sections
of the income statement, U.S. GAAP requires this method of
reporting.
U.S. GAAP recognizes liability and asset gains and losses in
“Accumulated other comprehensive income” and amortizes these
amounts to income over remaining service lives (generally using
the “corridor approach”). Under IFRS, companies recognize both
liability and asset gains and losses (referred to as
remeasurements) in other comprehensive income. These gains
and losses are not “recycled” into income in subsequent periods.
U.S. GAAP has separate standards for pensions and
postretirement benefits, and significant differences exist in the
accounting. The accounting for pensions and other
postretirement benefit plans is the same under IFRS.
About the Numbers
As indicated, U.S. GAAP and IFRS differ in the amounts included in
pension expense. Consider the following pension expense elements
for Altidore SA, as measured under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
U.S.
GAAP
IFRS
Current service cost
€28,000 €28,000
Past service cost
—
30,000

--- Page 1881 ---
Interest expense
21,000
21,000
Interest revenue
— (18,000)
Expected return on plan assets
(28,800)
—
Amortization of past service cost (10-year service
lives)
3,000
—
Amortization of liability and asset gain/loss
500
—
Pension expense
€23,700 €61,000
Under U.S. GAAP, in determining pension expense, Altidore includes
only current service cost and expected return on plan assets (which
excludes unexpected gains and losses). Unexpected gains and losses
and past service costs are amortized to income over the service lives of
employees. Under IFRS, Altidore includes all service costs and net
interest elements in pension expense. Thus, depending on the
features of the pension plan (e.g., in a year when past service costs are
granted), pension expense can be significantly different between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS.
On the Horizon
The IASB and the FASB have been working collaboratively over the
years on a postretirement benefit project and, as a result, their
accounting in this area is similar. However, as the “About the
Numbers” section above illustrates, significant differences remain in
the components of pension expense. If the FASB restarts a project to
reexamine expense measurement of postretirement benefit plans, it
likely will consider the recent IASB amendments in this area.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. At the end of the current period, Oxford Ltd. has a projected benefit
obligation of $195,000 and pension plan assets with a fair value of
$110,000. The amount of the vested benefits for the plan is $105,000.
What amount related to its pension plan will be reported on the
company’s statement of financial position (balance sheet) under U.S.
GAAP?

--- Page 1882 ---
a. $5,000.
b. $90,000.
c. $85,000.
d. $20,000.
2. Which of the following is false?
a. U.S. GAAP amortizes PSC over the remaining service lives of
employees.
b. IFRS recognizes PSC as a component of pension expense in
income immediately.
c. U.S. GAAP recognizes liability and asset gains and losses in
“Accumulated other comprehensive income” and amortizes these
amounts to income over remaining service live (generally using
the “corridor approach”).
d. U.S. GAAP has a single standard for the accounting for pensions
and other post-employment benefits.
3. For 2022, Carson Majors Inc. had pension expense of $77 million
and contributed $55 million to the pension fund. Which of the
following is the journal entry that Carson Majors would make to
record pension expense and funding under U.S. GAAP?
a. Pension Expense
77,000,000
Pension Asset/Liability
22,000,000
Cash
55,000,000
b. Pension Expense
77,000,000
Pension Asset/Liability 22,000,000
Cash
99,000,000

--- Page 1883 ---
c. Pension Expense
55,000,000
Pension Asset/Liability 22,000,000
Cash
77,000,000
d. Pension Expense
22,000,000
Pension Asset/Liability 55,000,000
Cash
77,000,000
4. Which of the following is true?
a. IFRS does not permit defined contribution plans.
b. U.S. GAAP and IFRS accounts for defined contribution plans
similarly.
c. U.S. GAAP and IFRS amortize past service costs over the
remaining service lives of employees.
d. Like IFRS, U.S. GAAP recognizes both liability and asset gains and
losses in other comprehensive income and does not “recycle” the
losses into income in subsequent periods.
5. Towson Company has experienced tough competition for its
talented workforce, leading it to enhance the pension benefits
provided to employees. As a result, Towson amended its pension plan
on January 1, 2022, and granted past service costs of $250,000. The
average remaining service lives of its employees is 5 years. Under U.S.
GAAP, what effect will the granting of the PSC have in 2022?
a. Increase pension expense by $250,000.
b. Have no effect on pension expense.
c. Decrease pension expense by $50,000.
d. Increase pension expense by $50,000.

--- Page 1884 ---
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP20.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences
between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to the accounting for
pensions and other postretirement benefits.
GAAP20.2 Briefly discuss the convergence efforts that are underway
with respect to the accounting for pensions and other postretirement
benefits.
GAAP20.3 The pension disclosure for Zarle, prepared under U.S.
GAAP, is as follows.
Zarle Company 
Notes to the Financial Statements
Note D. The company has a pension plan covering substantially all
of its employees. The plan is non-contributory and provides pension
benefits that are based on the employee’s compensation during the
three years immediately preceding retirement. The pension plan’s
assets consist of cash, stocks shares, and bonds. The company’s
funding policy is consistent with the relevant government (ERISA)
and tax regulations.
Pension expense for 2023 is comprised of the following components
of pension cost.
Service cost
$16,000
Interest on projected benefit obligation
26,500
Expected return on plan assets
(15,960)
Amortization of prior service cost
17,600
Amortization of net loss
172
Pension expense
$44,312
Other changes in plan assets and benefit obligations
recognized in other comprehensive income
Net actuarial gain
$ 6,212
Amortization of prior service cost
17,600

--- Page 1885 ---
Zarle Company 
Notes to the Financial Statements
Total recognized in other comprehensive income
(23,812)
Total recognized in pension expense and other
comprehensive income
$20,500
The estimated net actuarial loss and prior service cost for the defined
benefit pension plan that will be amortized from accumulated other
comprehensive into pension expense over the next year are estimated
to be the same as this year.
The amount recognized as a non-current liability in the statement of
financial position is as follows:
Non-current liability
Pension liability
$98,900
The amounts recognized in accumulated other comprehensive
income related to pensions consist of:
Net actuarial loss
$23,728
Prior service cost
14,400
Total
$38,128
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at beginning of year
$265,000
Service cost
16,000
Interest cost
26,500
Amendments (Prior service cost)
–0–
Actuarial gain
–0–
Benefits paid
(18,000)
Benefit obligation at end of year
289,500
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year
159,600
Actual return on plan assets
22,000

--- Page 1886 ---
Zarle Company 
Notes to the Financial Statements
Contributions
27,000
Benefits paid
(18,000)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year
190,600
Funded status (liability)
$ 98,900
The weighted-average discount rate used in determining the 2023
projected benefit obligation was 10 percent. The rate of increase in
future compensation levels used in computing the 2023 projected
benefit obligation was 4.5 percent. The weighted-average expected
long-term rate of return on the plan’s assets was 10 percent.
Instructions
Use the information on Zarle to respond to the following
requirements.
a. What are the key differences in accounting for pensions under
U.S. GAAP and IFRS?
b. Briefly explain how differences in U.S. GAAP and IFRS for
pensions would affect the amounts reported in the financial
statements.
c. In light of the differences identified in (b), would Zarle’s income
and equity be higher or lower under U.S. GAAP compared to IFRS
standards? Explain.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. d 3. a 4. b 5. d
Notes
1 When used as a verb, fund means to pay to a funding agency (as to
fund future pension benefits or to fund pension cost). Used as a
noun, it refers to assets accumulated in the hands of a funding

--- Page 1887 ---
agency (trustee) for the purpose of meeting pension benefits when
they become due.
2 The IASB issued a separate standard covering the accounting and
reporting for employee benefit plans. [1] (See the Authoritative
Literature References section near the end of the chapter.)
3 In many cases, companies offer a defined contribution plan in
combination with a defined benefit plan.
4 An actuary’s primary purpose is to ensure that the company has
established an appropriate funding pattern to meet its pension
obligations. This computation involves developing a set of
assumptions and continued monitoring of these assumptions to
ensure that they are realistic. IFRS encourages, but does not
require, companies to use actuaries in the measurement of the
pension amounts. [3] That the general public has little
understanding of what an actuary does is illustrated by the
following excerpt from the Wall Street Journal: “A polling
organization once asked the general public what an actuary was,
and received among its more coherent responses the opinion that it
was a place where you put dead actors.”
5 When we use the term “present value of benefits” throughout this
chapter, we really mean the actuarial present value of benefits.
Actuarial present value is the amount payable adjusted to
reflect the time value of money and the probability of payment (by
means of decrements for events such as death, disability,
withdrawals, or retirement) between the present date and the
expected date of payment. For simplicity, though, we use the term
“present value” instead of “actuarial present value” in our
discussion.
6 IAS 32 states that a financial asset and a financial liability should be
offset and the net amount reported in the statement of financial
position when a company (a) has a legally enforceable right to set
off the recognized amounts and (b) intends either to settle on a net
basis, or to realize the asset and settle it simultaneously. [6]

--- Page 1888 ---
7 As indicated earlier, service cost is comprised of current and past
service cost. Determination of past service cost is based on the
same actuarial valuation model as that used for current service
cost. We discuss recognition of past service cost in a later section.
8 The IASB indicates that if the beginning of the year amount changes
materially (due to contributions to or payments out of the plan), an
adjustment to the beginning balances should be made. [8] For
homework purposes, unless information indicates that balances
have changed materially, use the beginning of the year balances.
9 The IASB does not provide guidance on which of these two
approaches is preferred. [10] For homework purposes, report the
service cost and net interest components of pension expense
separately in the operating and financing sections of the income
statement.
10 The use of a pension entry worksheet is recommended and
illustrated by Paul B. W. Miller, “The New Pension Accounting
(Part 2),” Journal of Accountancy (February 1987), pp. 86–94.
11 The IASB in IAS 19 limits the amount of a pension asset that is
recognized. The limit is called the asset ceiling and is based on a
recoverability test. This test, which has been further clarified in
IFRIC 14, limits the amount of the pension asset to the sum of
unrecognized actuarial gains and losses (discussed later in this
chapter). The test also restricts the amounts that will be received by
the company in the form of refunds or reduction of future
contributions. [11]
12 The IASB also indicates that gains and losses on non-routine
settlements are considered past service costs. [12] A settlement is
a payment of benefits that is not set out in the terms of the plan.
13 The IASB is silent as to whether the Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income account should be used instead of another
equity account, like Retained Earnings. For homework purposes,
use the Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income account. The
IASB also permits the transfer of the balance in the Accumulated

--- Page 1889 ---
Other Comprehensive Income account to other equity accounts at a
later date.
14 For homework purposes, report the service cost and net interest
components of pension expense separately in the operating and
financing sections of the statement of comprehensive income. Note
that other IFRSs require inclusion of some employee benefit costs
within the costs of assets, such as inventories and property, plant,
and equipment. Any postemployment benefit costs included in the
cost of such assets will include an appropriate proportion of service
cost and net interest. [15]
Sources: J. Raife, “Time to Talk Real Public Sector Pension Costs,” Financial Times (June
27, 2010); S. Johnson, “Sea Change in the Pipeline for BP’s Pension Fund,” Financial Times
(January 12, 2014); P. Wells, “GE Reins in Staff Pension Benefits,” Financial Times
(October 8, 2019); and Milliman, “2019 Corporate Pension Funding Study,”
www.milliman.com/Insight/2019-Corporate-Pension-Funding-Study.

--- Page 1890 ---
