CHAPTER 7
Cash and Receivables
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Indicate how to report cash and related items.
2. Define receivables and explain accounting issues related to their recognition.
3. Explain accounting issues related to valuation of accounts receivable.
4. Explain accounting issues related to recognition and valuation of notes
receivable.
5. Explain additional accounting issues related to accounts and notes
receivables.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 7
As the following opening story indicates, companies must keep track of global
cash balances in order to plan capital expenditures. In this chapter, we discuss
cash and receivables—two assets that are important to non-financial companies
such as Nortel (CAN) and Nokia (FIN), and financial companies like Bankia
Group (ESP) and UBS (CHE). The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.
Is Your Cash Trapped?
At one time, Apple (USA) executives explained what they planned to do with their
$98 billion in cash (pay a $2.65 dividend and buy back some of their shares).
However, what they were really talking about was not the full $98 billion but the $34
billion the company was holding in the United States. The other $64 billion was

--- Page 528 ---
sitting in overseas subsidiaries and likely would never find its way back to the United
States. The reason: at that time—before passage of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of
2017 (TCJA)—U.S. tax laws allowed companies to defer taxes on their profits from
international operations until they brought the cash back into the country.
In the wake of the TCJA, which enacted a tax on those foreign balances and reduced
the U.S. corporate tax rate from 39 percent to 21 percent, U.S. companies now have far
fewer incentives to keep cash locked up overseas. Indeed, one of the goals of the TCJA
was to encourage companies to bring those cash balances to the United States to
increase dividends, expand operations, and add jobs. However, the initial response
from the companies was much more muted than expected. As can be seen in the
following chart, the tax law change has had a limited impact on overseas cash
balances.
In addition, some companies have stopped disclosing foreign cash balances. For
example, the foreign cash disclosure disappeared from the first quarterly report after
the TCJA was enacted for U.S. companies Apple, Microsoft, and Oracle. The lack of
this information makes it more difficult to gauge whether the U.S. tax change is
stoking U.S. corporate investment as was hoped by TCJA proponents. Other U.S.
companies, like Qualcomm, Cisco, Caterpillar, and GE, have continued to put out
the number. Of those companies, Caterpillar and GE have reduced their offshore
holdings. One analyst doubted a major repatriation of foreign cash balances, noting,
“I’m not sure that companies, certainly at this stage of the business cycle, are going to
aggressively expand their plant and equipment balances in anticipation of even
greater demand for their products.”

--- Page 529 ---
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions
with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem
with solutions, are also available online.
Cash
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Indicate how to report cash and related items.
Cash, the most liquid of assets, is the standard medium of exchange and the basis for
measuring and accounting for all other items. Companies generally classify cash as a
current asset. Cash consists of coin, currency, and available funds on deposit at the
bank. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the
chapter.) Negotiable instruments such as money orders, certified checks, cashier’s
checks, personal checks, and bank drafts are also viewed as cash. What about savings
accounts? Banks do have the legal right to demand notice before withdrawal. But,
because banks rarely demand prior notice, savings accounts are considered cash.
Some negotiable instruments provide small investors with an opportunity to earn
interest. These items, more appropriately classified as temporary investments than as
cash, include money market funds, money market savings certificates, certificates of
deposit (CDs), and similar types of deposits and “short-term paper.” These securities
usually contain restrictions or penalties on their conversion to cash. Money market
funds that provide checking account privileges, however, are usually classified as cash.
Certain items present classification problems: Companies treat postdated checks
and I.O.U.s as receivables. They also treat travel advances as receivables if
collected from employees or deducted from their salaries. Otherwise, companies
classify the travel advance as a prepaid expense. Postage stamps on hand are
classified as part of office supplies inventory or as a prepaid expense. Because petty
cash funds and change funds are used to meet current operating expenses and
liquidate current liabilities, companies include these funds in current assets as cash.
Reporting Cash
Although the reporting of cash is relatively straightforward, a number of issues merit
special attention. These issues relate to the reporting of:
1. Cash equivalents.
2. Restricted cash.
3. Bank overdrafts.

--- Page 530 ---
Cash Equivalents
A common current classification is “Cash and cash equivalents.” Cash equivalents
are short-term, highly liquid investments that are both (a) readily convertible to
known amounts of cash and (b) subject to an insignificant risk of changes in value.
IFRS suggests that only investments with original maturities of three months or less
at acquisition qualify under these definitions. In addition, the cash and cash
equivalents should be held for the purposes of meeting short-term cash commitments
and not for investment purposes. [2] Examples of cash equivalents are government
bonds, commercial paper, and certain money market funds. Some companies combine
cash with short-term investments on the statement of financial position. In these
cases, they describe the amount of the short-term investments either parenthetically
or in the notes.
Most individuals think of cash equivalents as cash. Unfortunately, that is not always
the case. Some companies found out the hard way and have taken sizable write-downs
on cash equivalents. Their losses resulted because they purchased auction-rate notes
that declined in value. These notes carry interest rates that usually reset weekly and
often have long-maturity dates (as long as 30 years). Companies argued that such
notes should be classified as cash equivalents because they can be routinely traded at
auction on a daily basis. (In short, they are liquid and risk-free.) Auditors agreed and
permitted cash-equivalent treatment even though maturities extended well beyond
three months. But when the 2008 credit crunch hit, the auctions stopped, and the
value of these securities dropped because no market existed. In retrospect, the cash-
equivalent classification was misleading.
The IASB has studied whether to eliminate the cash-equivalent classification from
financial statement presentations altogether. One idea would have companies report
only cash. If an asset is not cash and is short-term in nature, it should be reported as a
temporary investment. An interesting moral to this story is that when times are good,
some sloppy accounting may work. But in bad times, it quickly becomes apparent that
sloppy accounting can lead to misleading and harmful effects for users of the financial
statements.
Restricted Cash
Petty cash, payroll, and dividend funds are examples of cash set aside for a particular
purpose. In most situations, these fund balances are not material. Therefore,
companies do not segregate them from cash in the financial statements. When
material in amount, companies segregate restricted cash from “regular” cash for
reporting purposes. The reason is that the cash is not being held for the purpose of
meeting short-term cash commitments. They are, instead, being held for a more
specific purpose. Note that this treatment would be used even if the specific
investments would otherwise qualify as cash equivalents.
Companies classify restricted cash either in the current assets or in the non-current
assets section, depending on the date of availability or disbursement. Classification in
the current section is appropriate if using the cash for payment of existing or

--- Page 531 ---
maturing obligations (within a year or the operating cycle, whichever is longer). On
the other hand, companies show restricted cash in the non-current section of the
statement of financial position if holding the cash for a longer period of time.
Cash classified in the non-current section is frequently set aside for plant expansion
and retirement of long-term debt. Infosys’s (IND) restricted cash disclosure is shown
in Illustration 7.1.
Infosys
Cash and Cash Equivalents (000,000). Cash and cash equivalents as of March 31,
2019 and March 31, 2018 include restricted cash and bank balances of ₹358 and
₹533, respectively. The restrictions are primarily on account of cash and bank
balances held by irrevocable trusts controlled by the Company, bank balances held as
margin money deposits against guarantees, and balances held in unpaid dividend
bank accounts.
ILLUSTRATION 7.1 Disclosure of Restricted Cash
Banks and other lending institutions often require customers to maintain minimum
cash balances in checking or savings accounts. These minimum balances, called
compensating balances, are “that portion of any demand deposit (or any time
deposit or certificate of deposit) maintained by a company which constitutes support
for existing borrowing arrangements of the company with a lending institution. Such
arrangements would include both outstanding borrowings and the assurance of future
credit availability.” [3]
To avoid misleading investors about the amount of cash available to meet recurring
obligations, companies should state separately legally restricted deposits held as
compensating balances against short-term borrowing arrangements among the
“Cash and cash equivalent items” in current assets. Companies should classify
separately restricted deposits held as compensating balances against long-term
borrowing arrangements as non-current assets in either the investments or other
assets sections, using a caption such as “Cash on deposit maintained as compensating
balance.” In cases where compensating balance arrangements exist without
agreements that restrict the use of cash amounts shown on the statement of financial
position, companies should describe the arrangements and the amounts involved in
the notes.
Bank Overdrafts
Bank overdrafts occur when a company writes a check for more than the amount in
its cash account. Companies should report bank overdrafts in the current liabilities
section, combining them to the amount reported as accounts payable. If material,

--- Page 532 ---
companies should disclose these items separately, either on the face of the statement
of financial position or in the related notes.1
Bank overdrafts are included as a component of cash if such overdrafts are repayable
on demand and are an integral part of a company’s cash management (such as the
common practice of establishing offsetting arrangements against other accounts at
the same bank). [4] Overdrafts not meeting these conditions should be reported as a
current liability.
Summary of Cash-Related Items
Cash and cash equivalents include the medium of exchange and most negotiable
instruments. If the item cannot be quickly converted to coin or currency, a company
separately classifies it as an investment, receivable, or prepaid expense. Companies
segregate and classify cash that is unavailable for payment of currently maturing
liabilities in the non-current assets section. Illustration 7.2 summarizes the
classification of cash-related items.

--- Page 533 ---
Classification of Cash, Cash Equivalents, and Non-Cash Items
Item
Classification
Comment
Cash
Cash
If unrestricted, report as cash.
 
If restricted, identify and classify as
current or non-current assets.
Petty cash and
change funds
Cash
Report as cash.
Short-term
paper
Cash equivalents
Investments with maturity of less than 3
months at acquisition, often combined
with cash.
Short-term
paper
Short-term investments Investments with maturity of 3 to 12
months.
Postdated
checks and
I.O.U.s
Receivables
Assumed to be collectible.
Travel
advances
Receivables
Assumed to be collected from employees
or deducted from their salaries.
Postage on
hand (as
stamps or in
postage
meters)
Prepaid expenses
May also be classified as office supplies
inventory.
Bank
overdrafts
Cash
If no offsetting allowed, current liability.
Compensating
balances
Cash separately
classified as a deposit
maintained as
compensating balance
Classify as current or non-current in the
statement of financial position. Disclose
separately in notes details of the
arrangement.
ILLUSTRATION 7.2 Classification of Cash-Related Items

--- Page 534 ---
Evolving Issue
What Counts for Cash?
What to include in the cash balance has been the subject of debate. As we have
learned, companies report both cash and cash equivalents as cash on their
statements of financial position. For balances not reported in cash but which need
to be available on relatively short notice to pay for inventory, employees, or other
expenses, companies have a variety of parking places. As shown in the adjacent
chart, companies plow the largest portion of their cash holdings into corporate
debt. As indicated, corporate debt is the parking place of choice, followed by U.S.
Treasury and agency debt. Surveyed corporate treasurers say that high-grade
corporate bonds are preferred because they are reasonably safe while providing a
greater yield premium relative to Treasury securities. Seems like a good strategy
as long as the corporate issuers can make their payments. However, if the
economy takes a downturn, similar to investments in auction-rate notes, these
investments may not be true cash equivalents.
What about cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin? These currencies are generating a
significant amount of press given their rapid increases in value and extreme
volatility. Because of this volatility, the value of Bitcoin in circulation has recently
fluctuated between $100 and $300 billion. Cryptocurrency—despite its name—is
not accounted for as currency and is not included in cash and cash equivalents.
Various members of the international accounting community have begun to
express their perspectives on the proper accounting for cryptocurrency holdings.
Both the Australian and the Japanese standard-setting boards have expressed

--- Page 535 ---
their opinions on this matter. Given that the current accounting and reporting
framework does not contemplate cryptocurrencies, some are urging standard-
setters and regulators to provide guidance by developing an accounting
framework for cryptocurrency holdings, including the costs related to “mining”
efforts.
In June 2019, the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee
(IFRIC) of the IASB issued a summary decision concluding that most holdings of
cryptocurrency would properly be accounted for as intangible assets. The
committee did note in its report that if a business, such as a cryptocurrency
broker-dealer, held cryptocurrency for sale in the ordinary course of business,
then it should be accounted for as inventory.
Sources: J. Willhite, “Companies Park Cash in Corporate Debt,” Wall Street Journal (December 4, 2012);
and IFRIC Update (June 2019).
Receivables
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Define receivables and explain accounting issues related to their recognition.
Receivables (often referred to as loans and receivables) are claims held against
customers and others for money, goods, or services. An example of a loan is a
financial institution like HSBC (GBR) providing funds to Fiat (ITA). An example of a
receivable is a company like Airbus (FRA) recording an account receivable when it
sells an airplane on account to All Nippon Airways Co. Ltd. (JPN). For purposes of
discussion, we will simply use the term receivables to mean loans and receivables.
For financial statement purposes, companies classify receivables as either current
(short-term) or non-current (long-term). Companies expect to collect current
receivables within a year or during the current operating cycle, whichever is longer.
They classify all other receivables as non-current. Receivables are further classified
in the statement of financial position as either trade or non-trade receivables.
Customers often owe a company amounts for goods bought or services rendered. A
company may subclassify these trade receivables, usually the most significant item
in its current assets, into accounts receivable and notes receivable. Accounts
receivable are oral promises of the purchaser to pay for goods and services sold.
They represent “open accounts” resulting from short-term extensions of credit. A
company normally collects them within 30 to 60 days. Notes receivable are written
promises to pay a certain sum of money on a specified future date. They may arise
from sales, financing, or other transactions. Notes may be short-term or long-term.
Non-trade receivables arise from a variety of transactions. Some examples of non-
trade receivables are:

--- Page 536 ---
1. Advances to officers and employees.
2. Advances to subsidiaries.
3. Deposits paid to cover potential damages or losses.
4. Deposits paid as a guarantee of performance or payment.
5. Dividends and interest receivable.
6. Claims against:
a. Insurance companies for casualties sustained.
b. Defendants under suit.
c. Governmental bodies for tax refunds.
d. Common carriers for damaged or lost goods.
e. Creditors for returned, damaged, or lost goods.
f. Customers for returnable items (crates, containers, etc.).
Because of the peculiar nature of non-trade receivables, companies generally report
them as separate items in the statement of financial position. Illustration 7.3 shows
the reporting of trade and non-trade receivables in the statements of financial
position of Heineken (NLD) and Nokia (FIN).

--- Page 537 ---
Heineken
(in millions of €)
Current assets
Inventories
€ 1,920
Trade and other receivables
3,740
Current tax assets
71
Derivative assets
35
Cash and cash equivalents
2,903
Assets classified as held for sale
401
Total current assets
€ 9,070
Nokia
(in millions of €)
Current assets
Inventories
€  3,168
Trade receivables
4,856
Contract assets
1,875
Prepaid expenses and accrued income
1,024
Current income tax assets
227
Other financial assets
243
Current financial investments
612
Cash and cash equivalents
6,261
Total current assets
€18,266
ILLUSTRATION 7.3 Receivables Statement of Financial Position
Presentations
The basic issues in accounting for accounts and notes receivable are the same:
recognition and valuation. We discuss these basic issues for accounts and notes
receivable next.

--- Page 538 ---
Recognition of Accounts Receivable
As indicated, accounts receivable generally arise as part of a revenue arrangement. For
example, if Lululemon Athletica, Inc. (CAN) sells a yoga outfit to Jennifer Burian
for $100 on account, when does Lululemon recognize revenue (the sale) and the
related accounts receivable? As indicated in Chapter 2, the revenue recognition
principle indicates that Lululemon should recognize revenue when it satisfies its
performance obligation by transferring the good or service to the customer. It follows
that in the Lululemon situation, the yoga outfit is transferred when Jennifer obtains
control of this outfit.
When this change in control occurs, Lululemon should recognize an account
receivable and sales revenue. Lululemon makes the following entry, assuming that
$100 is the amount it expects to receive from Jennifer.
Accounts Receivable 100
Sales Revenue
100
The concept of change of control is the deciding factor in determining when a
performance obligation is satisfied and an account receivable recognized. Here are
some key indicators used to determine that Lululemon has transferred and that
Jennifer has obtained control of the yoga outfit.
1. Lululemon has the right to payment from the customer. If Jennifer is
obligated to pay, it indicates that control has passed to the customer.
2. Lululemon has passed legal title to the customer. If Jennifer has legal title
to the goods, it indicates that control has passed to the customer.
3. Lululemon has transferred physical possession of the goods. If Jennifer
has physical possession, it indicates that control has passed to the customer.
4. Lululemon no longer has significant risks and rewards of ownership of
the goods. If Jennifer now has the significant risks and rewards of ownership, it
indicates that control has passed to the customer.
5. Jennifer has accepted the asset.
Measurement of the Transaction Price
The transaction price is the amount of consideration that a company expects to
receive from a customer in exchange for transferring goods or services. In the
Lululemon case, the transaction price is easily determined because Jennifer Burian
agrees to pay a fixed amount to Lululemon over a short period of time. However, in
other situations, companies must take into account items such as variable
consideration, which may affect the accounts receivable balance.
Variable Consideration

--- Page 539 ---
In some cases, the price of a good or service is dependent on future events. These
future events often include such items as discounts, returns and allowances, rebates,
and performance bonuses. Here are four items that affect the transaction price and
thus the accounts receivable balance.
Trade Discounts
Prices may be subject to a trade or quantity discount. Companies use such trade
discounts to avoid frequent changes in catalogs, to alter prices for different
quantities purchased, or to hide the true invoice price from competitors.
Trade discounts are commonly quoted in percentages. For example, say your cell
phone has a list price of $90, and the manufacturer sells it to Best Buy (USA) for list
less a 40 percent trade discount. The manufacturer then records the receivable at $54
per phone. The manufacturer, per normal practice, simply deducts the trade discount
from the list price and bills the customer net. As another example, assume Ryobi
(JPN) sells a cordless drill with a suggested retail price of $99.99 to a retailer like
Home Depot (USA) for $70, a trade discount of approximately 30 percent. Home
Depot in turn sells the drill for $99.99. Ryobi records the accounts receivable and
related sales revenue at $70, not $99.99.
Cash Discounts (Sales Discounts)
Companies offer cash discounts (sales discounts) to induce prompt payment.
Cash discounts are generally presented in terms such as 2/10, n/30 (2 percent if paid
within 10 days, gross amount due in 30 days), or 2/10, E.O.M., net 30, E.O.M. (2
percent if paid any time by the tenth day of the following month, with full payment
due by the thirtieth of the following month).
Customers usually take sales discounts unless their cash is severely limited. Why? A
customer that receives a 1 percent reduction in the sales price for payment within 10
days, total payment due within 30 days, effectively earns 18.25 percent [.01 ÷ (20 ÷
365)], or at least avoids that rate of interest cost.
Companies should record accounts receivable and related revenue at the amount of
consideration expected to be received from a customer. [5] For example, assume that
Hanley Company sells goods for €10,000 to Murdoch Group with terms 2/10, net 30,
and Hanley expects that the discount will be taken. As a result, Hanley records the
accounts receivable and related sales revenue at its net price of €9,800. This approach
is often referred to as the net method, as it attempts to value the receivable at its cash
realizable value.
If Murdoch fails to take the discount, then Hanley debits the discount not taken to
accounts receivable and credits Sales Discounted Forfeited. Sales Discounts Forfeited
is shown in the “Other income and expense” section of the income statement.2
Theoretically, the net method is correct because the receivable is stated at cash
realizable value (assuming estimates are correct) and the net sales measures the
revenue recognized from the sale. However, many companies continue to use what is
referred to as the gross method in recording the receivable and related sales.3

--- Page 540 ---
If Hanley uses the gross method, it records the accounts receivable and related sales
revenue at €10,000, not €9,800. Under the gross method, Hanley recognizes sales
discounts when it receives payment within the discount period. Hanley’s income
statement then shows sales discounts as a deduction from sales to arrive at net sales.
The entries in Illustration 7.4 show the difference between the gross method and
the net method.
ILLUSTRATION 7.4 Entries under Gross and Net Methods of Recording
Cash (Sales) Discounts
We present the gross method because companies may not use the net method for
practicability reasons. That is, the net method requires additional analysis and
bookkeeping to record sales discounts forfeited on accounts receivable that have
passed the discount period. If collection periods are relatively short, using either the
gross or the net method results in the same amounts for revenues and receivables,
which are equal to the transaction price. Any differences that arise are likely to be
immaterial.
Sales Returns and Allowances
Another form of variable consideration relates to sales returns and allowances. For
example, assume that Max Glass sells hurricane glasses to Oliver Builders. As part of
the sales agreement, Max includes a provision that if Oliver is dissatisfied with the
product, Max will grant an allowance on the sales price or agree to take the product
back. As a result, Max should record the accounts receivable and related revenue at
the amount of consideration expected to be received. The amount to be recorded will
include an estimate of sales returns.
To illustrate, assume that on January 4, 2022, Max sells $5,000 of hurricane glasses
to Oliver on account. At the time of the sale, Max expects, based on past experience

--- Page 541 ---
and current market conditions, that $400 of the hurricane glasses will be returned.
Max records the sale on account and the estimated amount of the returns as follows.
January 4, 2022
Accounts Receivable 5,000
Sales Revenue
4,600
Return Liability
400
On January 16, 2022, Max grants an allowance of $300 to Oliver because some of the
hurricane glasses are defective. The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
January 15, 2022
Return Liability
300
Accounts Receivable
300
As a result of these transactions, Max reports net sales revenue on the income
statement of $4,600, which is the amount Max expects to receive from Oliver from
the sale of the glasses. In addition, Max reports on its statement of nancial position
the total accounts receivable balance of $4,700 ($5,000 − $300) and an estimated
return liability of $100 ($400 − $300). While the balances in the Accounts Receivable
and Return Liability accounts are not netted against one another in the statement of
financial position, the net amount of $4,600 represents the amount of cash that Max
expects to receive from this sale.
The use of the Return Liability account is helpful to management because it helps to
identify potential problems associated with inferior merchandise, inefficiencies in
filling orders, and delivery or shipment mistakes.4
Time Value of Money
Another variable consideration issue relates to the time value of money. Ideally, a
company should measure receivables in terms of their present value, that is, the
discounted value of the cash to be received in the future. When expected cash receipts
require a waiting period, the receivable face amount is not worth the amount that the
company ultimately receives.
To illustrate, assume that Carrefour (FRA) makes a sale on account for €1,000 with
payment due in four months. The applicable annual rate of interest is 12 percent, and
payment is made at the end of four months. The present value of that receivable is not
€1,000 but €961.54 (€1,000 × .96154). In other words, the €1,000 Carrefour receives
four months from now is not the same as the €1,000 received today.
Theoretically, any revenue after the period of sale is interest revenue. In practice,
companies ignore interest revenue related to accounts receivable because the amount
of the discount is not usually material in relation to the net income for the period (see
Underlying Concepts). The profession specifically excludes from present value
considerations “receivables arising from transactions with customers in the normal
course of business which are due in customary trade terms not exceeding

--- Page 542 ---
approximately one year.” [6] However, when receivables are longer lived, and
therefore the financing component is significant, the amount originally recorded
should be adjusted for the time value of money.
Underlying Concepts
Materiality means the information must make a difference to a decision-maker.
The IASB believes that present value concepts can be ignored for short-term
receivables.
Valuation of Accounts Receivable
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain accounting issues related to valuation of accounts receivable.
As one revered accountant aptly noted, the credit manager’s idea of heaven probably
would be a place where everyone (eventually) paid his or her debts.5 Unfortunately,
this situation often does not occur. For example, a customer may not be able to pay
because of a decline in its sales revenue due to a downturn in the economy. Similarly,
individuals may be laid off from their jobs or faced with unexpected hospital bills.
Companies record credit losses as debits to Bad Debt Expense (or Uncollectible
Accounts Expense). Such losses are a normal and necessary risk of doing business on
a credit basis.
Two methods are used in accounting for uncollectible accounts: (1) the direct write-
off method and (2) the allowance method. The following sections explain these
methods.
Direct Write-Off Method for Uncollectible Accounts
Under the direct write-off method, when a company determines a particular
account to be uncollectible, it charges the loss to Bad Debt Expense. Assume, for
example, that on December 10, 2022, Cruz Ltd. writes off as uncollectible Yusado’s
NT$8,000,000 balance. The entry is as follows.
December 10, 2022
Bad Debt Expense
8,000,000
Accounts Receivable (Yusado)
8,000,000
(To record write-off of Yusado account)
Under this method, Bad Debt Expense will show only actual losses from
uncollectibles. The company will report accounts receivable at its gross amount.

--- Page 543 ---
Supporters of the direct write-off-method (which is often used for tax purposes)
contend that it records facts, not estimates. It assumes that a good account receivable
resulted from each sale, and that later events revealed certain accounts to be
uncollectible and worthless. From a practical standpoint, this method is simple and
convenient to apply. But the direct write-off method is theoretically deficient. It
usually fails to record expenses as incurred and does not result in receivables being
stated at cash realizable value on the statement of financial position. As a result,
using the direct write-off method is not considered appropriate, except
when the amount uncollectible is immaterial.
Allowance Method for Uncollectible Accounts
The allowance method of accounting for bad debts involves estimating
uncollectible accounts at the end of each period. This ensures that companies state
receivables on the statement of financial position at their cash realizable value. Cash
realizable value is the net amount the company expects to receive in cash. At each
financial statement date, companies estimate uncollectible accounts and cash
realizable value using information about past and current events as well as forecasts
of future collectibility. As a result, the statement of financial position reflects the
current estimate of expected uncollectible account losses at the reporting date, and
the income statement reflects the effects of credit deterioration (or improvement)
that has taken place during the period.
Many companies set their credit policies to provide for a certain percentage of
uncollectible accounts. (In fact, many feel that failure to reach that percentage means
that they are losing sales due to overly restrictive credit policies.) Thus, the IASB
requires the allowance method for financial reporting purposes when bad debts are
material in amount. This method has three essential features:
1. Companies estimate uncollectible accounts receivable and compare the new
estimate to the current balance in the allowance account.
2. Companies debit estimated increases in uncollectibles to Bad Debt Expense and
credit them to Allowance for Doubtful Accounts (a contra asset account) through
an adjusting entry at the end of each period.
3. When companies write off a specific account, they debit actual uncollectibles to
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts and credit that amount to Accounts Receivable.
Recording Estimated Uncollectibles
To illustrate the allowance method, assume that in 2022, its first year of operations,
Brown Furniture has credit sales of £1,800,000. Of this amount, £150,000 remains
uncollected at December 31. The credit manager estimates that £10,000 of these sales
will be uncollectible. The adjusting entry to record the estimated uncollectibles
(assuming a zero balance in the allowance account) is:
December 31, 2022

--- Page 544 ---
Bad Debt Expense
10,000
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
10,000
(To record estimate of uncollectible accounts)
Brown reports Bad Debt Expense in the income statement as an operating expense.
Thus, Brown records the increased estimated uncollectibles as bad debt expense in the
period of credit deterioration.
As Illustration 7.5 shows, the company deducts the allowance account from
accounts receivable in the current assets section of the statement of financial
position.
Brown Furniture 
Statement of Financial Position (partial)
Current assets
Prepaid insurance
£ 25,000
Inventory
300,000
Accounts receivable
£150,000
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
10,000
140,000
Cash
£ 15,000
Total current assets
£480,000
ILLUSTRATION 7.5 Presentation of Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts shows the estimated amount of claims on
customers that the company expects it will not collect in the future.6 Companies use a
contra account instead of a direct credit to Accounts Receivable because they do not
know which customers will not pay. The credit balance in the allowance account will
absorb the specific write-offs when they occur. The amount of £140,000 in
Illustration 7.5 represents the cash realizable value of the accounts receivable at
the statement date. Companies do not close Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
at the end of the fiscal year.
Recording the Write-Off of an Uncollectible Account
When companies have exhausted all means of collecting a past-due account and
collection appears impossible, the company should write off the account. In the credit
card industry, for example, it is standard practice to write off accounts that are 210
days past due.
To illustrate a receivables write-off, assume that the financial vice president of Brown
Furniture authorizes a write-off of the £1,000 balance owed by Randall plc on March
1, 2023. The entry to record the write-off is:
March 1, 2023
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
1,000

--- Page 545 ---
Accounts Receivable (Randall plc)
1,000
(Write-off of Randall plc account)
Bad Debt Expense does not increase when the write-off occurs. Under the
allowance method, companies debit every bad debt write-off to the
allowance account rather than to Bad Debt Expense. A debit to Bad Debt
Expense would be incorrect because the company has already recognized the expense
when it made the adjusting entry for estimated bad debts. Instead, the entry to record
the write-off of an uncollectible account reduces both Accounts Receivable and
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts.
Recovery of an Uncollectible Account
Occasionally, a company collects from a customer after it has written off the account
as uncollectible. The company makes two entries to record the recovery of a bad debt:
(1) It reverses the entry made in writing off the account. This reinstates the
customer’s account. (2) It records the collection in the usual manner.
To illustrate, assume that on July 1, 2023, Randall plc pays the £1,000 amount that
Brown Furniture had written off on March 1. These are the entries:
July 1, 2023
Accounts Receivable (Randall plc)
1,000
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
1,000
(To reverse write-off of account)
Cash
1,000
Accounts Receivable (Randall plc)
1,000
(Collection of account)
Note that the recovery of a bad debt, like the write-off of a bad debt, affects only
statement of financial position accounts. The net effect of the two entries above
is a debit to Cash and a credit to Allowance for Doubtful Accounts for £1,000.7
Estimating the Allowance
To simplify the preceding explanation, we assumed we knew the amount of the
expected uncollectibles. In “real life,” companies must estimate that amount when
they use the allowance method. As indicated, expected uncollectible accounts are
estimated based on information about past events (loss experience), adjusted for
current conditions and reasonable forecasts of factors that would affect uncollectible
accounts. While much judgment is involved, the goal is to develop the best estimate of
expected uncollectible receivables.8
For example, a company can estimate the percentage of its outstanding receivables
that will become uncollectible, without identifying specific accounts. This procedure
provides a reasonably accurate estimate of the receivables’ realizable value. Hence, it
is referred to as the percentage-of-receivables approach.9

--- Page 546 ---
Companies may apply this method using one composite rate that reflects an
estimate of the uncollectible receivables. Or, companies may set up an aging
schedule of accounts receivable, which applies a different percentage based on past
experience to the various age categories. An aging schedule also identifies which
accounts require special attention by indicating the extent to which certain accounts
are past due. The schedule of Wilson & Co. in Illustration 7.6 is an example.
Wilson reports bad debt expense of €26,610 for this year, assuming that no balance
existed in the allowance account.10
To change the illustration slightly, assume that the allowance account had a
credit balance of €800 before adjustment. In this case, Wilson adds €25,810
(€26,610 − $800) to the allowance account and makes the following entry.
Bad Debt Expense
25,810
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
25,810
Wilson & Co.
Aging Schedule
Name of
Customer
Balance
Dec. 31
Under 30
days
30–60
days
61–90
days
91–120
days
Over 120
days
Western Stainless
Steel
€ 98,000
€ 15,000 € 65,000 €18,000
Brockway Steel
320,000
280,000
40,000
Freeport Sheet &
Tube
55,000
€55,000
Allegheny Iron
Works
74,000
50,000
10,000
€14,000
€547,000
€345,000 €115,000 €18,000
€14,000
€55,000
Age
Amount
Percentage Estimated to Be
Uncollectible*
Required Balance in
Allowance
Under 30 days €345,000
0.8%
€ 2,760
30–60 days
115,000
4.0
4,600
61–90 days
18,000
15.0
2,700
91–120 days
14,000
20.0
2,800
Over 120 days
55,000
25.0
13,750
Year-end balance of allowance for doubtful accounts
€26,610
* Estimates are based on historical loss rates, taking into consideration whether and, if so, how the historical loss
rates differ from what is currently expected over the life of the trade receivables (on the basis of current conditions
and reasonable and supportable forecasts about the future).
ILLUSTRATION 7.6 Accounts Receivable Aging Schedule

--- Page 547 ---
Wilson therefore states the balance in the allowance account at €26,610. If the
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts balance before adjustment had a debit
balance of €200, then Wilson records bad debt expense of €26,810 (€26,610
desired balance + €200 debit balance). In the percentage-of-receivables method,
Wilson cannot ignore the balance in the allowance account because the percentage is
related to a real account (Accounts Receivable).
Companies do not prepare an aging schedule only to determine bad debt expense.
They often prepare it as a control device to determine the composition of receivables
and to identify delinquent accounts. In the Wilson example, the aging analysis was
used to classify receivables according to a risk factor (days past due) that is related to
the collectibility of the receivables. Other approaches are acceptable as long as the
estimation techniques are applied consistently over time with the objective of
faithfully estimating expected uncollectible accounts. [7] For example, a company
may use historical loss ratios for customers with different credit ratings as a basis for
estimating uncollectible accounts. Or, a company may utilize a probability-weighted
discounted cash flow model (as illustrated in Chapter 6) to estimate expected credit
losses. The discounted cash flow approach is generally appropriate when analyzing an
individual loan or receivable.
Regardless of the estimation approach used, determining the expense associated with
uncollectible accounts requires a large degree of judgment (see Underlying
Concepts). Recent concern exists that some banks use this judgment to manage
earnings. By overestimating the amounts of uncollectible loans in a good earnings
year, the bank can “save for a rainy day” in a future period. In less-profitable periods,
banks can reduce the overly conservative allowance for loan loss account to increase
earnings.11
Underlying Concepts
The primary objective for financial statement purposes is to report receivables in
the statement of financial position at cash realizable value. The allowance for
doubtful accounts as a percentage of receivables will vary, depending on the
industry and the economic climate.
Notes Receivable
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Explain accounting issues related to recognition and valuation of notes receivable.
A note receivable is supported by a formal promissory note, a written promise to
pay a certain sum of money at a specific future date. Such a note is a negotiable
instrument that a maker signs in favor of a designated payee who may legally and
readily sell or otherwise transfer the note to others. Although all notes contain an

--- Page 548 ---
interest element because of the time value of money, companies classify them as
interest-bearing or non-interest-bearing. Interest-bearing notes have a stated rate
of interest. Zero-interest-bearing notes (non-interest-bearing) include interest as
part of their face amount. Notes receivable are considered fairly liquid, even if long-
term, because companies can easily convert them to cash (although they might pay a
fee to do so).
Companies frequently accept notes receivable from customers who need to extend the
payment period of an outstanding receivable. Or they require notes from high-risk or
new customers. In addition, companies often use notes in loans to employees and
subsidiaries, and in the sales of property, plant, and equipment. In some industries
(e.g., the pleasure and sport boat industry), notes support all credit sales. The majority
of notes, however, originate from lending transactions. The basic issues in accounting
for notes receivable are the same as those for accounts receivable: recognition,
valuation, and derecognition.
Recognition of Notes Receivable
Companies record and report long-term notes receivable at the present value of the
cash they expect to collect. When the interest stated on an interest-bearing note
equals the effective (market) rate of interest, the note is recorded at face value.12
When the stated rate differs from the market rate, the cash exchanged (present value)
differs from the face value of the note. Companies then record this difference, either a
discount or a premium, and amortize it over the life of a note to approximate the
effective (market) interest rate. This illustrates one of the many situations in which
time value of money concepts are applied to accounting measurement.
Note Issued at Face Value
To illustrate the discounting of a note issued at face value, assume that Bigelow SA
lends Scandinavian Imports €10,000 in exchange for a €10,000, three-year note
bearing interest at 10 percent annually. The market rate of interest for a note of
similar risk is also 10 percent. We show the time diagram depicting both cash flows in
Illustration 7.7.
ILLUSTRATION 7.7 Time Diagram for Note Issued at Face Value
Bigelow computes the present value or exchange price of the note as shown in
Illustration 7.8.

--- Page 549 ---
Face value of the note
€10,000
Present value of the principal:
€10,000 (PVF3,10%) = €10,000 × .75132
€7,513
Present value of the interest:
€1,000 (PVF-OA3,10%) = €1,000 × 2.48685
2,487
Present value of the note
(10,000)
Difference
€  –0–
ILLUSTRATION 7.8 Present Value of Note—Stated and Market Rates the
Same
In this case, the present value of the note equals its face value because the market
(effective) and stated rates of interest are the same. Bigelow records the receipt of the
note as follows.
Notes Receivable 10,000
Cash
10,000
Bigelow recognizes interest revenue each year as follows.
Cash
1,000
Interest Revenue
1,000
Note Not Issued at Face Value

--- Page 550 ---
Zero-Interest-Bearing Notes
If a company receives a zero-interest-bearing note, its present value is the cash paid to
the issuer. Because the company knows both the future amount and the present value
of the note, it can compute the interest rate. This rate is often referred to as the
implicit interest rate. Companies record the difference between the future (face)
amount and the present value (cash paid) as a discount and amortize it to interest
revenue over the life of the note.
To illustrate, Jeremiah Company receives a three-year, $10,000 zero-interest-bearing
note, the present value of which is $7,721.80. The implicit rate that equates the total
cash to be received ($10,000 at maturity) to the present value of the future cash flows
($7,721.80) is 9 percent (the present value of 1 for three periods at 9 percent is
.77218). We show the time diagram depicting the one cash flow in Illustration 7.9.
ILLUSTRATION 7.9 Time Diagram for Zero-Interest-Bearing Note
Jeremiah records the note receivable for the present value ($7,721.80), as follows.
Notes Receivable 7,721.80
Cash
7,721.80
Companies amortize the discount, and recognize interest revenue annually using the
effective-interest method. Illustration 7.10 shows the three-year discount
amortization and interest revenue schedule.

--- Page 551 ---
Schedule of Note Discount Amortization
Effective-Interest Method
0% Note Discounted at 9%
Cash
Received
Interest
Revenue
Discount
Amortized
Carrying Amount of
Note
Date of
issue
$ 7,721.80
End of year
1
$ –0–
$ 694.96a
$ 694.96b
8,416.76c
End of year
2
–0–
757.51
757.51
9,174.27
End of year
3
–0–
825.73d
825.73
10,000.00
$ –0–
$2,278.20
$2,278.20
a$7,721.80 × .09 = $694.96
b$694.96 − $0 = $694.96
c$7,721.80 + $694.96 = $8,416.76
d5¢ adjustment to compensate for rounding
ILLUSTRATION 
7.10 
Discount 
Amortization 
Schedule—Effective-
Interest Method
Jeremiah records interest revenue at the end of the first year using the effective-
interest method as follows.

--- Page 552 ---
Notes Receivable
694.96
Interest Revenue ($7,721.80 × .09)
694.96
At the end of the year, Jeremiah increases notes receivable and interest revenue. At
maturity, Jeremiah receives the face value of the note.
Interest-Bearing Notes
Often the stated rate and the effective rate differ. The zero-interest-bearing note is
one example.
To illustrate a more common situation, assume that Morgan Group makes a loan to
Marie Co. and receives in exchange a three-year, €10,000 note bearing interest at 10
percent annually. The market rate of interest for a note of similar risk is 12 percent.
We show the time diagram depicting both cash flows, with interest paid annually in
Illustration 7.11.
ILLUSTRATION 7.11 Time Diagram for Interest-Bearing Note
Morgan computes the present value of the two cash flows as shown in Illustration
7.12.
Face value of the note
€10,000
Present value of the principal:
€10,000 (PVF3,12%) = €10,000 × .71178
€7,118
Present value of the interest:
€1,000 (PVF-OA3,12%) = €1,000 × 2.40183 2,402
Present value of the note
9,520
Difference (Discount)
€ 
480
ILLUSTRATION 7.12 Computation of Present Value—Effective Rate
Different from Stated Rate
In this case, because the effective rate of interest (12 percent) exceeds the stated rate
(10 percent), the present value of the note is less than the face value. That is, Morgan
exchanged the note at a discount. Morgan records the present value of the note as
follows.

--- Page 553 ---
Notes Receivable 9,520
Cash
9,520
Morgan then amortizes the discount and recognizes interest revenue annually using
the effective-interest method. Illustration 7.13 shows the three-year discount
amortization and interest revenue schedule.
Schedule of Note Discount Amortization 
Effective-Interest Method 
10% Note Discounted at 12%
Cash
Received
Interest
Revenue
Discount
Amortized
Carrying Amount of
Note
Date of
issue
€  9,520
End of year
1
€1,000a
€1,142b
€142c
9,662d
End of year
2
1,000
1,159
159
9,821
End of year
3
1,000
1,179
179
10,000
€3,000
€3,480
€480
a€10,000 × .10 = €1,000
b€9,520 × .12 = €1,142
c€1,142 − €1,000 = €142
d€9,520 + €142 = €9,662
ILLUSTRATION 
7.13 
Discount 
Amortization 
Schedule—Effective-
Interest Method
On the date of issue, the note has a present value of €9,520. Additional interest
revenue spread over the three-year life of the note, as a result, is €480 (€10,000 −
€9,520).
At the end of year 1, Morgan receives €1,000 in cash. But its interest revenue is €1,142
(€9,520 × .12). The difference between €1,000 and €1,142 is the amortized discount,
€142. Morgan records receipt of the annual interest and amortization of the discount
for the first year as follows (amounts per amortization schedule).
Cash
1,000
Notes Receivable
142
Interest Revenue
1,142

--- Page 554 ---
The carrying amount of the note is now €9,662 (€9,520 + €142). Morgan repeats this
process until the end of year 3.
When the present value exceeds the face value, the note is exchanged at a premium.
Companies record the premium on a note receivable as a debit and amortize it using
the effective-interest method over the life of the note as annual reductions in the
amount of interest revenue recognized.
Notes Received for Property, Goods, or Services
When a note is received in exchange for property, goods, or services in a
bargained transaction entered into at arm’s length, the stated interest rate is
presumed to be fair unless one of the following occurs.
1. No interest rate is stated.
2. The stated interest rate is unreasonable.
3. The face amount of the note is materially different from the current cash sales
price for the same or similar items or from the current fair value of the debt
instrument.
In these circumstances, the company measures the present value of the note by the
fair value of the property, goods, or services or by an amount that reasonably
approximates the fair value of the note.
To illustrate, Oasis Development Co. sold a corner lot to Rusty Pelican as a restaurant
site. Oasis accepted in exchange a five-year note having a maturity value of $35,247
and no stated interest rate. The land originally cost Oasis $14,000. At the date of sale,
the land had a fair value of $20,000. Given the criterion above, Oasis uses the fair

--- Page 555 ---
value of the land, $20,000, as the present value of the note. Oasis therefore records
the sale as:
Notes Receivable
20,000
Land
14,000
Gain on Disposal of Land ($20,000 − $14,000)
6,000
Oasis amortizes the discount to interest revenue over the five-year life of the note
using the effective-interest method.
Choice of Interest Rate
In note transactions, other factors involved in the exchange, such as the fair value of
the property, goods, or services, determine the effective or real interest rate. But, if a
company cannot determine that fair value because the note has no ready market,
determining the present value of the note is more difficult. To estimate the present
value of a note under such circumstances, the company must approximate an
applicable interest rate that may differ from the stated interest rate. This process of
interest-rate approximation is called imputation. The resulting interest rate is called
an imputed interest rate.
The prevailing rates for similar instruments, from issuers with similar credit ratings,
affect the choice of a rate. Restrictive covenants, collateral, payment schedule, and the
existing prime interest rate also impact the choice. A company determines the
imputed interest rate when it receives the note. It ignores any subsequent changes in
prevailing interest rates.
Valuation of Notes Receivable
Like accounts receivable, companies record and report short-term notes receivable at
their cash realizable value—that is, at their face amount less all necessary allowances.
The primary notes receivable allowance account is Allowance for Doubtful Accounts.
The computations and estimations involved in valuing short-term notes receivable
and in recording bad debt expense and the related allowance exactly parallel that
for trade accounts receivable. Companies estimate the amount of uncollectibles
by an analysis of the receivables. As discussed earlier (see footnote 8), receivables
with a significant financing component (such as long-term notes) involve additional
estimation problems. As a result, the IASB has established guidelines for alternative
approaches that could be used to estimate impairments of financial instruments,
which we discuss in Chapter 17.
Other Issues Related to Receivables
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Explain additional accounting issues related to accounts and notes receivables.

--- Page 556 ---
Additional issues related to receivables are:
1. Derecognition of receivables.
2. Presentation and analysis.
Derecognition of Receivables
At what point should a receivable no longer be included as an asset of a company like
Unilever (NLD)—that is, derecognized? One situation occurs when the receivable
no longer has any value; that is, the contractual rights to the cash flows of the
receivable no longer exist. For example, if Unilever has a receivable from a customer
who declares bankruptcy, the value of this receivable has expired. Similarly, when
Unilever collects a receivable when due, it removes this receivable from its books. In
both cases, Unilever no longer has any contractual rights to these receivables. As a
result, the receivables are derecognized.
A second situation often occurs if Unilever transfers (e.g., sells) a receivable to
another company, thereby transferring the risks and rewards of ownership to this
other company. As an example, if Garcia Company sells its receivables to Holt Inc. and
transfers all the risks and rewards of ownership to Holt, the receivables are
derecognized. Although this guideline is straightforward, it is sometimes difficult to
assess whether some or all of the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred. The
following discussion highlights the key issues related to transfers of receivables.
Transfers of Receivables
There are various reasons for the transfer of receivables to another party. For
example, in order to accelerate the receipt of cash from receivables, companies may
transfer receivables to other companies for cash. In addition, for competitive reasons,
providing sales financing for customers is virtually mandatory in many industries. In
the sale of durable goods, such as automobiles, trucks, industrial and farm equipment,
computers, and appliances, most sales are on an installment contract basis. Many
major companies in these industries have created wholly owned subsidiaries
specializing in receivables financing. For example, Daimler (DEU) has Daimler
Truck Financial (DEU), and Toyota (JPN) has Toyota Motor Credit (JPN).
Second, the holder may sell receivables because money is tight and access to normal
credit is unavailable or too expensive. Also, a firm may sell its receivables, instead of
borrowing, to avoid violating existing lending agreements.
Finally, billing and collection of receivables are often time-consuming and costly.
Credit card companies such as MasterCard, Visa and American Express take
over the collection process and provide merchants with immediate cash.
Conversely, some purchasers of receivables buy them to obtain the legal protection
of ownership rights afforded a purchaser of assets versus the lesser rights afforded a
secured creditor. In addition, banks and other lending institutions may need to

--- Page 557 ---
purchase receivables because of legal lending limits. That is, they cannot make any
additional loans, but they can buy receivables and charge a fee for this service.
The transfer of receivables to a third party for cash happens in one of two ways:
1. Sale of receivables.
2. Secured borrowing.
Sales of Receivables
Sales of receivables have increased substantially in recent years. A common type is a
sale to a factor. Factors are finance companies or banks that buy receivables from
businesses for a fee and then collect the remittances directly from the customers.
Factoring receivables is traditionally associated with the textile, apparel, footwear,
furniture, and home furnishing industries.13 Illustration 7.14 shows a typical
factoring arrangement.
ILLUSTRATION 7.14 Basic Procedures in Factoring
Sale without Guarantee
When buying receivables, the purchaser generally assumes the risk of collectibility
and absorbs any credit losses. A sale of this type is often referred to as a sale without
guarantee (without recourse) against credit loss. The transfer of receivables in
this case is an outright sale of the receivables both in form (transfer of title) and
substance (transfer of risks and rewards). As in any sale of assets, the seller debits
Cash for the proceeds and credits Accounts Receivable for the face value of the
receivables. The seller recognizes the difference, reduced by any provision for
probable adjustments (discounts, returns, allowances, etc.), as a Loss on Sale of
Receivables. The seller uses a Due from Factor account (reported as a receivable) to

--- Page 558 ---
account for the proceeds retained by the factor to cover probable sales discounts, sales
returns, and sales allowances.
To illustrate, Crest Textiles factors €500,000 of accounts receivable with Commercial
Factors on a non-guarantee (or without recourse) basis. Crest Textiles transfers
the receivable records to Commercial Factors, which will receive the collections.
Commercial Factors assesses a finance charge of 3 percent of the amount of accounts
receivable and retains an amount equal to 5 percent of the accounts receivable (for
probable adjustments). Crest Textiles and Commercial Factors make journal entries
for the receivables transferred without guarantee as shown in Illustration 7.15.
Crest Textiles
Commercial Factors
Cash
460,000
Accounts (Notes)
Receivable
500,000
Due from Factor
25,000*
Due to Customer
(Crest Textiles)
25,000
Loss on Sale of
Receivables
15,000**
Interest Revenue
15,000
Accounts (Notes)
Receivable
500,000
Cash
460,000
*(.05 × €500,000)
**(.03 × €500,000)
ILLUSTRATION 7.15 Entries for Sale of Receivables without Guarantee
In recognition of the sale of receivables, Crest Textiles records a loss of €15,000. The
factor’s net income will be the difference between the interest (financing) revenue of
€15,000 and the amount of any uncollectible receivables.
Sale with Guarantee
To illustrate a sale with guarantee (with recourse), in which a purchaser of
receivables has protection against credit losses, assume that Crest Textiles issues a
guarantee to Commercial Factors to compensate Commercial Factors for any credit
losses on receivables transferred. In this situation, the question is whether the risks
and rewards of ownership are transferred to Commercial Factors or remain with Crest
Textile. In other words, is it to be accounted for as a sale or a borrowing?
In this case, given that there is a guarantee for all defaults, it appears that the risks
and rewards of these receivables still remain with Crest Textiles. As a result, the
transfer is considered a borrowing—sometimes referred to as a failed sale. Crest
Textiles continues to recognize the receivable on its books, and the transaction is
treated as a borrowing.14
Assuming the same information as in Illustration 7.15, the journal entries for both
Crest Textiles and Commercial Factors are shown in Illustration 7.16.

--- Page 559 ---
Crest Textiles
Commercial Factors
Cash
460,000
Accounts (Notes)
Receivable
500,000
Due from Factor
25,000
Due to Customer
Finance Charge
15,000
(Crest Textiles)
25,000
Recourse
Liability
500,000
Interest Revenue
15,000
Cash
460,000
ILLUSTRATION 7.16 Sale with Guarantee
In this case, Crest Textiles records a liability to Commercial Factors. Commercial
Factors records an accounts receivable from Crest Textiles. The accounting for a failed
sale is similar to that for a secured borrowing. As the transferred receivables are
collected, the Recourse Liability account on the books of Crest Textiles is reduced.
Similarly, on the books of Commercial Factors, the accounts receivable from Crest
Textiles is also reduced.
Secured Borrowing
A company often uses receivables as collateral in a borrowing transaction. In fact, a
creditor often requires that the debtor designate (assign) or pledge15 receivables as
security for the loan. If the loan is not paid when due, the creditor can convert the
collateral to cash—by collecting the receivables.
To illustrate, on March 1, 2022, Meng Mills provides (assigns) NT$700,000 of its
accounts receivable to Sino Bank as collateral for a NT$500,000 note. Meng Mills
continues to collect the accounts receivable; the account debtors are not notified of
the arrangement. Sino Bank assesses a finance charge of 1 percent of the accounts
receivable and interest on the note of 12 percent. Meng Mills makes monthly
payments to the bank for all cash it collects on the receivables. Illustration 7.17
shows the entries for the secured borrowing for Meng Mills and Sino Bank.

--- Page 560 ---
ILLUSTRATION 7.17 Entries for Transfer of Receivables—Secured
Borrowing
In addition to recording the collection of receivables, Meng Mills must recognize all
discounts, returns and allowances, and bad debts. Each month, Meng Mills uses the
proceeds from the collection of the accounts receivable to retire the note obligation.
In addition, it pays interest on the note.16
Summary of Transfers
The IASB uses the term derecognition when referring to the accounting for
transfers of receivables. According to the IASB, determining whether receivables that
are transferred can be derecognized and accounted for as a sale is based on an
evaluation of whether the seller has transferred substantially all the risks and rewards
of ownership of the financial asset. Illustration 7.18 summarizes the accounting
guidelines for transfers of receivables. [9]

--- Page 561 ---
ILLUSTRATION 7.18 Accounting for Transfers of Receivables
As indicated, if substantially all the risks and rewards of ownership of the receivable
are transferred, then it is derecognized. However, if substantially all of the risks and
rewards are not transferred, then the company treats the transfer as a secured
borrowing. If sale accounting is appropriate, a company must still consider assets
obtained and liabilities incurred in the transaction (e.g., a guarantee).17
Presentation and Analysis
Presentation of Receivables
The general rules in classifying receivables are: [10]
1. Segregate and report the carrying amounts of the different categories of
receivables.
2. Indicate the receivables classified as current and non-current in the statement of
financial position.
3. Appropriately offset the valuation accounts for receivables that are impaired,
including a discussion of individual and collectively determined impairments.
4. Disclose the fair value of receivables in a way that permits comparisons with the
carrying amount of the receivables.
5. Disclose information to assess the credit risk inherent in the receivables by
providing information on:
a. Receivables that are neither past due nor impaired.

--- Page 562 ---
b. The carrying amount of receivables that would otherwise be past due or
impaired, but whose terms have been renegotiated.
c. For receivables that are either past due or impaired, provide an analysis of
the age of the receivables that are past due as of the end of the reporting
period.
6. Disclose any receivables pledged as collateral.
7. Disclose all significant concentrations of credit risk arising from receivables.18
The assets section of Colton AG’s statement of financial position in Illustration 7.19
shows many of the disclosures required for receivables.
Analysis of Receivables
Accounts Receivable Turnover
Analysts frequently compute financial ratios to evaluate the liquidity of a company’s
accounts receivable. To assess the liquidity of the receivables, they use the accounts
receivable turnover. This ratio measures the number of times, on average, a
company collects receivables during the period. The ratio is computed by dividing net
sales by average (net) receivables outstanding during the year. Theoretically, the
numerator should include only net credit sales, but this information is frequently
unavailable. However, if the relative amounts of credit and cash sales remain fairly
constant, the trend indicated by the ratio will still be valid. Barring significant
seasonal factors, average receivables outstanding can be computed from the beginning
and ending balances of net trade receivables.
To illustrate, Louis Vuitton (LVMH Group) (FRA) recently reported net sales of
€35,664 million. Its beginning and ending (net) accounts receivable balances were
€2,274 million and €2,521 million, respectively. Illustration 7.20 shows the
computation of its accounts receivable turnover.
This information19 shows how successful the company is in collecting its outstanding
receivables (see Underlying Concepts). If possible, an aging schedule should also
be prepared to help determine how long receivables have been outstanding. A
satisfactory accounts receivable turnover may have resulted because certain
receivables were collected quickly though others have been outstanding for a
relatively long period. An aging schedule would reveal such patterns.
Underlying Concepts
Providing information that will help users assess a company’s current liquidity
and prospective cash flows is a primary objective of accounting.
Often, the accounts receivable turnover is transformed to days to collect accounts
receivable or days outstanding—an average collection period. In this case, 14.9 is

--- Page 563 ---
divided into 365 days, resulting in 24.5 days. Companies frequently use the average
collection period to assess the effectiveness of their credit and collection policies. The
general rule is that the average collection period should not greatly exceed the credit
term period. That is, if customers are given a 60-day period for payment, then the
average collection period should not be too much in excess of 60 days.
ILLUSTRATION 7.19 Disclosure of Receivables

--- Page 564 ---
= Accounts Receivable Turnover
= 14.9 times, or every 24.5 days (365 ÷ 14.9)
ILLUSTRATION 7.20 Computation of Accounts Receivable Turnover
Net Sales
Average Trade Receivables (net)
€35, 664
(€2, 274 + €2, 521) ÷ 2

--- Page 565 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Securitizations—Good or Bad?
A popular form of sale (transfer) of receivables is securitization. Securitization
takes a pool of assets, such as credit card receivables, mortgage receivables, or car
loan receivables, and sells shares in these pools of interest and principal
payments. This, in effect, creates securities backed by these pools of assets.
Virtually every asset with a payment stream and a long-term payment history is a
candidate for securitization. What are the differences between factoring and
securitization? Factoring usually involves sale to only one company, fees are high,
the quality of the receivables is low, and the seller afterward does not service the
receivables. In a securitization, many investors are involved, margins are tight,
the receivables are of generally higher quality, and the seller usually continues to
service the receivables.
Securitizations can be a positive force in the mortgage market by increasing
liquidity that banks need for mortgage lending. This improved accounting
supports positive outcomes from securitizations in the mortgage market.
However, securitizations got a black eye in the booming mortgage market leading
up to the financial crisis of 2008. In that setting, mortgage loans to high-risk
(subprime) borrowers were securitized with lenders selling the loans to
investment banks or trusts (special purpose entities) at a gain. Investors in the
securities issued by the trusts were happy because they earned a return that they
believed was excellent, given the risk they took. However, due to lax regulatory
oversight of the mortgage lending process, many of the securitizations resulted in
lenders having to take back the loans when subprime borrowers could not make
the payments as the economy and the housing market slowed.
The costs of these bad securitizations were still being felt by banks several years
after the mortgage market meltdown. The moral of the story is that accounting
matters. Lenders had strong incentives to want to report upfront gains on sales of
loans. But, in most cases, these gains should never have been booked. Standard-
setters have since issued new rules to tighten up “gain-on-sale” accounting for
securitizations and loan losses. With these new rules, lenders have to keep the
loans on their statements of financial position. Under these conditions, lenders
would be much less likely to lend so much money to individuals with poor credit
ratings.
Sources: M. Hudson, “How Wall Street Stoked the Mortgage Meltdown,” Wall Street Journal (June 27,
2007), p. A10; Associated Press, “Legal Costs Weigh Down U.S. Banks Earnings,” The New York Times
(February 24, 2015); and B. Conerly, “Why Borrowers Need Securitization,” Forbes (June 5, 2018).
APPENDIX 7A Cash Controls

--- Page 566 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Explain common techniques employed to control cash.
Cash is the asset most susceptible to improper diversion and use. Management faces
two problems in accounting for cash transactions: (1) to establish proper controls to
prevent any unauthorized transactions by officers or employees, and (2) to provide
information necessary to properly manage cash on hand and cash transactions. Yet,
even with sophisticated control devices, errors can and do happen. For example, the
Wall Street Journal ran a story entitled “A $7.8 Million Error Has a Happy Ending for
a Horrified Bank.” The story described how Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co.
(USA) mistakenly overpaid about $7.8 million in cash dividends to its shareholders.
(As implied in the headline, most shareholders returned the monies.)
To safeguard cash and to ensure the accuracy of the accounting records for cash,
companies need effective internal control over cash. For example, in the United
States, provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act call for enhanced efforts to increase the
quality of internal control (for cash and other assets). Such efforts are expected to
result in improved financial reporting. In this appendix, we discuss some of the basic
control issues related to cash.
Using Bank Accounts
To obtain desired control objectives, a company can vary the number and location of
banks and the types of bank accounts. For large companies operating in multiple
locations, the location of bank accounts can be important. Establishing collection
accounts in strategic locations can accelerate the flow of cash into the company by
shortening the time between a customer’s mailing of a payment and the company’s
use of the cash. Multiple collection centers generally reduce the size of a company’s
collection float. This is the difference between the amount on deposit according to
the company’s records and the amount of collected cash according to the bank
records.
Large, multilocation companies frequently use lockbox accounts to collect in cities
with heavy customer billing. The company rents a local post office box and authorizes
a local bank to pick up the remittances mailed to that box number. The bank empties
the box at least once a day and immediately credits the company’s account for
collections. The greatest advantage of a lockbox is that it accelerates the availability of
collected cash. Generally, in a lockbox arrangement, the bank images the checks for
recordkeeping purposes and provides the company with a deposit slip, a list of
collections, and any customer correspondence. Thus, a lockbox system improves the
control over cash and accelerates collection of cash. If the income generated from
accelerating the receipt of funds exceeds the cost of the lockbox system, then it is a
worthwhile undertaking.

--- Page 567 ---
The general checking account is the principal bank account in most companies
and frequently the only bank account in small businesses. A company deposits cash
into and disburses cash from this account. A company cycles all transactions through
it. For example, a company deposits from and disburses to all other bank accounts
through the general checking account.
Companies use imprest bank accounts to make a specific amount of cash available
for a limited purpose. The account acts as a clearing account for a large volume of
checks or for a specific type of check. To clear a specific and intended amount through
the imprest account, a company transfers that amount from the general checking
account or other source. Companies often use imprest bank accounts for disbursing
payroll checks, dividends, commissions, bonuses, confidential expenses (e.g., officers’
salaries), and travel expenses.
The Imprest Petty Cash System
Almost every company finds it necessary to pay small amounts for miscellaneous
expenses such as taxi fares, minor office supplies, and employees’ lunches.
Disbursements by check for such items are often impractical, yet some control over
them is important. A simple method of obtaining reasonable control, while adhering
to the rule of disbursement by check, is the imprest system for petty cash
disbursements. This is how the system works:
1. The company designates a petty cash custodian, and gives the custodian a small
amount of currency from which to make payments. It records transfer of funds to
petty cash as:
Petty Cash 300
Cash
300
2. The petty cash custodian obtains signed receipts from each individual to whom
he or she pays cash, attaching evidence of the disbursement to the petty cash
receipt. Petty cash transactions are not recorded until the fund is reimbursed;
someone other than the petty cash custodian records those entries.
3. When the supply of cash runs low, the custodian presents to the controller or
accounts payable cashier a request for reimbursement supported by the petty
cash receipts and other disbursement evidence. The custodian receives a
company check to replenish the fund. At this point, the company records
transactions based on petty cash receipts.

--- Page 568 ---
Supplies Expense
42
Postage Expense
53
Miscellaneous Expense 76
Cash Over and Short
2
Cash
173
4. If the company decides that the amount of cash in the petty cash fund is
excessive, it lowers the fund balance as follows.
Cash
50
Petty Cash
50
Subsequent to establishment, a company makes entries to the Petty Cash account
only to increase or decrease the size of the fund.
A company uses a Cash Over and Short account when the petty cash fund fails to
prove out. That is, when an error occurs, such as incorrect change, overpayment of
expense, or lost receipt. If cash proves out short (i.e., the sum of the receipts and
cash in the fund is less than the imprest amount), the company debits the shortage to
the Cash Over and Short account. If cash proves out over, it credits the overage to
Cash Over and Short. The company closes Cash Over and Short only at the end of the
year. It generally shows Cash Over and Short on the income statement as an “Other
expense or revenue.”
There are usually expense items in the fund except immediately after reimbursement.
Therefore, to maintain accurate financial statements, a company must reimburse the
funds at the end of each accounting period and also when nearly depleted.
Under the imprest system, the petty cash custodian is responsible at all times for the
amount of the fund on hand either as cash or in the form of signed receipts. These
receipts provide the evidence required by the disbursing officer to issue a
reimbursement check. Further, a company follows two additional procedures to
obtain more complete control over the petty cash fund:
1. A superior of the petty cash custodian makes surprise counts of the fund from
time to time to determine that a satisfactory accounting of the fund has occurred.
2. The company cancels or mutilates petty cash receipts after they have been
submitted for reimbursement, so that they cannot be used to secure a second
reimbursement.
Physical Protection of Cash Balances
Not only must a company safeguard cash receipts and cash disbursements through
internal control measures, but it must also protect the cash on hand and in banks.
Because receipts become cash on hand and disbursements are made from cash in

--- Page 569 ---
banks, adequate control of receipts and disbursements is part of the protection of cash
balances, along with certain other procedures.
Physical protection of cash is so elementary a necessity that it requires little
discussion. A company should make every effort to minimize the cash on hand in the
office. It should only have on hand a petty cash fund, the current day’s receipts, and
perhaps funds for making change. Insofar as possible, it should keep these funds in a
vault, safe, or locked cash drawer. The company should transmit intact each day’s
receipts to the bank as soon as practicable. Accurately stating the amount of available
cash both in internal management reports and in external financial statements is also
extremely important.
Every company has a record of cash received and disbursed, and the balance. Because
of the many cash transactions, however, errors or omissions may occur in keeping
this record. Therefore, a company must periodically prove the balance shown in the
general ledger. It can count cash actually present in the office—petty cash, change
funds, and undeposited receipts—for comparison with the company records. For cash
on deposit, a company prepares a bank reconciliation—a reconciliation of the
company’s record and the bank’s record of the company’s cash.
Reconciliation of Bank Balances
At the end of each calendar month, the bank supplies each customer with a bank
statement (a copy of the bank’s account with the customer) together with the
customer’s checks that the bank paid during the month.20 If neither the bank nor the
customer made any errors, if all deposits made and all checks drawn by the customer
reached the bank within the same month, and if no unusual transactions occurred
that affected either the company’s or the bank’s record of cash, the balance of cash
reported by the bank to the customer equals that shown in the customer’s own
records. This condition seldom occurs due to one or more of the reconciling items
presented below.

--- Page 570 ---
Reconciling Items
Deposits in transit. End-of-month deposits of cash recorded on the depositor’s
books in one month are received and recorded by the bank in the following
month.
Outstanding checks. Checks written by the depositor are recorded when
written but may not be recorded by (may not “clear”) the bank until the next
month.
Bank charges. Charges recorded by the bank against the depositor’s balance for
such items as bank services, printing checks, not-sufficient-funds (NSF)
checks, and safe-deposit box rentals. The depositor may not be aware of these
charges until the receipt of the bank statement.
Bank credits. Collections or deposits by the bank for the benefit of the depositor
that may be unknown to the depositor until receipt of the bank statement.
Examples are note collection for the depositor and interest earned on interest-
bearing checking accounts.
Bank or depositor errors. Errors on either the part of the bank or the part of
the depositor cause the bank balance to disagree with the depositor’s book
balance.
Hence, a company expects differences between its record of cash and the bank’s
record. Therefore, it must reconcile the two to determine the nature of the differences
between the two amounts.
A bank reconciliation is a schedule explaining any differences between the bank’s
and the company’s records of cash. If the difference results only from transactions not
yet recorded by the bank, the company’s record of cash is considered correct. But, if
some part of the difference arises from other items, either the bank or the company
must adjust its records.
A company may prepare two forms of a bank reconciliation. One form reconciles from
the bank statement balance to the book balance or vice versa. The other form
reconciles both the bank balance and the book balance to a correct cash balance. Most
companies use this latter form. Illustration 7A.1 shows a sample of that form and
its common reconciling items.
This form of reconciliation consists of two sections: (1) “Balance per bank statement”
and (2) “Balance per depositor’s books.” Both sections end with the same “Correct
cash balance.” The correct cash balance is the amount to which the books must be
adjusted and is the amount reported on the statement of financial position.
Companies prepare adjusting journal entries for all the addition and
deduction items appearing in the “Balance per depositor’s books” section.
Companies should immediately call to the bank’s attention any errors attributable to
it.

--- Page 571 ---
To illustrate, Nugget Mining Company’s books show a cash balance at the Denver
National Bank on November 30, 2022, of $20,502. The bank statement covering the
month of November shows an ending balance of $22,190. An examination of Nugget’s
accounting records and November bank statement identified the following reconciling
items.
Balance per bank statement (end of period)
$$$
Add: Deposits in transit
$$
Undeposited receipts (cash on hand)
$$
Bank errors that understate the bank statement balance
$$
$$
$$$
Deduct: Outstanding checks
$$
Bank errors that overstate the bank statement balance
$$
$$
Correct cash balance
$$$
Balance per depositor’s books
$$$
Add: Bank credits and collections not yet recorded in the books $$
Book errors that understate the book balance
$$
$$
$$$
Deduct:Bank charges not yet recorded in the books
$$
Book errors that overstate the book balance
$$
$$
Correct cash balance
$$$
ILLUSTRATION 7A.1 Bank Reconciliation Form and Content
1. A deposit of $3,680 that Nugget mailed November 30 does not appear on the
bank statement.
2. Checks written in November but not charged to the November bank statement
are:
Check #7327 $  150
#7348
4,820
#7349
31
3. Nugget has not yet recorded the $600 of interest collected by the bank November
20 on Sequoia Co. bonds held by the bank for Nugget.
4. Bank service charges of $18 are not yet recorded on Nugget’s books.
5. The bank returned one of Nugget’s customer’s checks for $220 with the bank
statement, marked “NSF.” The bank treated this bad check as a disbursement.
6. Nugget discovered that it incorrectly recorded check #7322, written in November
for $131 in payment of an account payable, as $311.

--- Page 572 ---
7. A check for Nugent Oil Co. in the amount of $175 that the bank incorrectly
charged to Nugget accompanied the statement.
Nugget reconciled the bank and book balances to the correct cash balance of $21,044
as shown in Illustration 7A.2.
Nugget Mining Company 
Bank Reconciliation 
Denver National Bank, November 30, 2022
Balance per bank statement (end of period)
$22,190
Add: Deposit in transit
(1) $3,680
Bank error—incorrect check charged to account by bank (7)
175
3,855
26,045
Deduct: Outstanding checks
(2)
5,001
Correct cash balance
$21,044
Balance per books
$20,502
Add: Interest collected by the bank
(3)
$ 600
Error in recording check #7322
(6)
180
780
21,282
Deduct: Bank service charges
(4)
18
NSF check returned
(5)
220
238
Correct cash balance
$21,044
ILLUSTRATION 7A.2 Sample Bank Reconciliation
The journal entries required to adjust and correct Nugget’s books in early December
2022 are taken from the items in the “Balance per books” section and are as follows.

--- Page 573 ---
After posting the entries, Nugget’s cash account will have a balance of $21,044.
Nugget should return the Nugent Oil Co. check to Denver National Bank, informing
the bank of the error.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accounts receivable
accounts receivable turnover
aging schedule
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
allowance method
*bank charges
*bank credits
*bank or depositor errors
bank overdrafts
*bank reconciliation
cash
cash (sales) discounts
cash equivalents
cash realizable value

--- Page 574 ---
compensating balances
*deposits in transit
derecognition
direct write-off method
factoring receivables
failed sale
*imprest system for petty cash
imputed interest rate
non-trade receivables
notes receivable
*not-sufficient-funds (NSF) checks
*outstanding checks
percentage-of-receivables approach
promissory note
receivables
restricted cash
sale with guarantee (with recourse)
sale without guarantee (without recourse)
trade discounts
trade receivables
transaction price
zero-interest-bearing notes
Learning Objectives Review
1 Indicate how to report cash and related items.
To be reported as “cash,” an asset must be readily available for the payment of current
obligations and free from contractual restrictions that limit its use in satisfying debts.
Cash consists of coin, currency, and available funds on deposit at the bank.
Negotiable instruments such as money orders, certified checks, cashier’s checks,
personal checks, and bank drafts are also viewed as cash. Savings accounts are usually
classified as cash.
Companies report cash as a current asset in the statement of financial
position. The reporting of other related items are as follows.

--- Page 575 ---
1. Restricted cash: Companies should state separately legally restricted deposits
held as compensating balances against short-term borrowing among the “Cash
and cash equivalent items” in current assets. Restricted deposits held against
long-term borrowing arrangements should be separately classified as non-current
assets in either the investments or other assets sections.
2. Bank overdrafts: Companies should report overdrafts in the current liabilities
section and usually add them to the amount reported as accounts payable. If
material, these items should be separately disclosed either on the face of the
statement of financial position or in the related notes.
3. Cash equivalents: Companies often report this item together with cash as “Cash
and cash equivalents.”
2 Define receivables and explain accounting issues related to their
recognition.
Receivables are claims held against customers and others for money, goods, or
services. The receivables are classified into three types: (1) current or non-current, (2)
trade or non-trade, and (3) accounts receivable or notes receivable. Two issues that
may complicate the measurement of accounts receivable are (1) the availability of
discounts (trade and cash discounts), and (2) the length of time between the sale and
the payment due dates (the interest element).
Ideally, companies should measure receivables in terms of their present value—that
is, the discounted value of the cash to be received in the future. The profession
specifically excludes from the present value considerations receivables arising from
normal business transactions that are due in customary trade terms within
approximately one year.
3 Explain accounting issues related to valuation of accounts receivable.
Companies value and report short-term receivables at cash realizable value—the net
amount expected to be received in cash, which is not necessarily the amount legally
receivable. Determining cash realizable value requires estimating uncollectible
receivables.
4 Explain accounting issues related to recognition and valuation of
notes receivable.
Companies record short-term notes at face value and long-term notes receivable at
the present value of the cash they expect to collect. When the interest stated on an
interest-bearing note equals the effective (market) rate of interest, the note sells at
face value. When the stated rate differs from the effective rate, a company records the
receivable net of the discount or premium. As with accounts receivable, companies

--- Page 576 ---
record and report short-term notes receivable at their cash realizable value. The same
is also true of long-term receivables.
5 Explain additional accounting issues related to accounts and notes
receivables.
Derecognition. To accelerate the receipt of cash from receivables, the owner may
transfer the receivables to another company for cash in one of two ways. (1) Sales
(factoring) of receivables: Factors are finance companies or banks that buy
receivables from businesses and then collect the remittances directly from the
customers. (2) Secured borrowing: A creditor often requires that the debtor designate
or pledge receivables as security for the loan. In many cases, transferors may have
some continuing involvement with the receivable sold.
Reporting and Analysis. Companies should report receivables with appropriate
offset of valuation accounts against receivables, classify receivables as current or non-
current, identify pledged or designated receivables, and disclose the credit risk
inherent in the receivables. Analysts assess receivables based on turnover and the
days outstanding.
*6 Explain common techniques employed to control cash.
The common techniques employed to control cash are as follows. (1) Using bank
accounts: A company can vary the number and location of banks and the types of
accounts to obtain desired control objectives. (2) The imprest petty cash system: It
may be impractical to require that small amounts of various expenses be paid by
check, yet some control over them is important. (3) Physical protection of cash
balances: Adequate control of receipts and disbursements is a part of the protection of
cash balances. Every effort should be made to minimize the cash on hand in the
office. (4) Reconciliation of bank balances: Cash on deposit is not available for count
and is proved by preparing a bank reconciliation.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
The trial balance before adjustment for Slamar Ltd. shows the following balances
(in thousands).
Debit
Credit
Net sales
¥860,000

--- Page 577 ---
Accounts receivable
338,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts
¥4,240
Consider the following independent situations:
1. To obtain additional cash, Slamar factors without guarantee ¥50,000 of
accounts receivable with Ijiri Finance. The finance charge is 11% of the amount
factored.
2. To obtain a 1-year loan of ¥75,000, Slamar assigns ¥80,000 of specific
receivable accounts to Chen Financial. The finance charge is 9% of the loan; the
cash is received and the accounts turned over to Chen Financial.
3. The company wants to maintain Allowance for Doubtful Accounts at 6% of
gross accounts receivable.
Instructions
a. Using the data above, give the journal entries required to record situations 1–3.
b. Discuss how analysis based on the current ratio and the accounts receivable
turnover would be affected if Slamar had transferred the receivables in
situation 1 using a secured borrowing.
Solution
a.  
1. Cash
44,500
Loss on Sale of Receivables (¥50,000 × .11)
5,500
Accounts Receivable
50,000
2. Cash
68,250
Interest Expense (¥75,000 × .09)
6,750
Notes Payable
75,000
3. Bad Debt Expense
16,040
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts [(¥338,000 × .06) −
¥4,240]
16,040
b. With a secured borrowing, the receivables would stay on Slamar’s books, and
Slamar would record a note payable. This would reduce the current ratio and
accounts receivable turnover.

--- Page 578 ---
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics
Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are available for
practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the
appendix to the chapter.
Questions
1. What may be included under the heading of “cash”?
2. In what accounts should the following items be classified?
a. Coins and currency.
b. Government bonds.
c. Certificate of deposit (matures in 5 months).
d. Cash in a bank that is in receivership.
e. NSF check (returned with bank statement).
f. Deposit in foreign bank (exchangeability limited).
g. Postdated checks.
h. Cash to be used for retirement of long-term bonds.
i. Deposits in transit.
j. 100 shares of Daimler (DEU) (intention is to sell in one year or less).
k. Savings and checking accounts.
l. Petty cash.
m. Stamps.
n. Travel advances.
3. Define a “compensating balance.” How should a compensating balance be
reported?
4. Feng Group reported in a recent annual report “Restricted cash for debt
redemption.” What section of the statement of financial position would report this
item?
5. What are the reasons that a company gives trade discounts? Why are trade
discounts not recorded in the accounts like cash discounts?
6. What are two methods of recording accounts receivable transactions when a cash
discount situation is involved? Which is more theoretically correct? Which is used in
practice more of the time? Why?

--- Page 579 ---
7. Discuss the accounting for sales allowances and how they relate to the concept of
variable consideration.
8. What are the basic problems that occur in the valuation of accounts receivable?
9. What is the theoretical justification of the allowance method as contrasted with the
direct write-off method of accounting for bad debts?
10. Indicate how the percentage-of-receivables method, based on an aging schedule,
accomplishes the objectives of the allowance method of accounting for bad debts.
What other methods, besides an aging analysis, can be used for estimating
uncollectible accounts?
11. Of what merit is the contention that the allowance method lacks the objectivity of
the direct write-off method? Discuss in terms of accounting’s measurement function.
12. Explain how the accounting for bad debts can be used for earnings management.
13. Because of calamitous earthquake losses, Bernstein Company, one of your client’s
oldest and largest customers, suddenly and unexpectedly became bankrupt.
Approximately 30% of your client’s total sales have been made to Bernstein Company
during each of the past several years. The amount due from Bernstein Company—
none of which is collectible—equals 22% of total accounts receivable, an amount that
is considerably in excess of what was determined to be an adequate provision for
doubtful accounts at the close of the preceding year. How would your client record the
write-off of the Bernstein Company receivable if it is using the allowance method of
accounting for bad debts? Justify your suggested treatment.
14. What is the normal procedure for handling the collection of accounts receivable
previously written off using the direct write-off method? The allowance method?
15. On January 1, 2022, Antorio SpA sells property for which it had paid €690,000 to
Sargent Company, receiving in return Sargent’s zero-interest-bearing note for
€1,000,000 payable in 5 years. What entry would Antorio make to record the sale,
assuming that Antorio frequently sells similar items of property for a cash sales price
of €640,000?
16. What is “imputed interest”? In what situations is it necessary to impute an
interest rate for notes receivable? What are the considerations in imputing an
appropriate interest rate?
17. Indicate three reasons why a company might sell its receivables to another
company.
18. When is the risks and rewards approach to recording the transfers of receivables
used? When should a transfer of receivables be recorded as a sale?
19. Moon Hardware is planning to factor some of its receivables. The cash received
will be used to pay for inventory purchases. The factor has indicated that it will
require a full guarantee (with recourse) on the sold receivables. Explain to the
controller of Moon Hardware what “full guarantee” is and how the guarantee will be
reflected in Moon’s financial statements after the sale of the receivables.

--- Page 580 ---
20. Horizon Outfitters AG includes in its trial balance for December 31 an item for
Accounts Receivable €789,000. This balance consists of the following items:
Due from regular customers
€523,000
Refund receivable on prior year’s income taxes (an established claim)
15,500
Travel advance to employees
22,000
Loan to wholly owned subsidiary
45,500
Advances to creditors for goods ordered
61,000
Accounts receivable assigned as security for loans payable
75,000
Notes receivable past due plus interest on these notes
47,000
Total
€789,000
Illustrate how these items should be shown in the statement of financial position as
of December 31.
21. What is the accounts receivable turnover, and what type of information does it
provide?
22. You are evaluating Woodlawn Racetrack for a potential loan. An examination of
the notes to the financial statements indicates restricted cash at year-end amounts to
$100,000. Explain how you would use this information in evaluating Woodlawn’s
liquidity.
*23. Distinguish among the following: (1) a general checking account, (2) an imprest
bank account, and (3) a lockbox account.
Brief Exercises
BE7.1 (LO 1) Kraft Enterprises owns the following assets at December 31, 2022.
Cash in bank—savings account
€68,000
Cash on hand
9,300
Tax refund due
31,400
Checking account balance
17,000
Postdated checks
750
Certificates of deposit (180-day)
90,000
What amount should be reported as cash?
BE7.2 (LO 2) Restin plc uses the gross method to record sales made on credit. On
June 1, 2022, it made sales of £50,000 with terms 3/15, n/45. On June 12, 2022,
Restin received full payment for the June 1 sale. Prepare the required journal entries
for Restin plc.
BE7.3 (LO 2) Use the information from BE7.2, assuming Restin plc uses the net
method to account for cash discounts. Prepare the required journal entries for Restin

--- Page 581 ---
plc.
BE7.4 (LO 3) Roeher Company sold $9,000 of its specialty shelving to Elkins Office
Supply Co. on account. Prepare the entries when (a) Roeher makes the sale, (b)
Roeher grants an allowance of $700 when some of the shelving does not meet exact
specifications but still could be sold by Elkins, and (c) at year-end, Roeher estimates
that an additional $200 in allowances will be granted to Elkins.
BE7.5 (LO 3) Wilton, AG had net sales in 2022 of €1,400,000. At December 31, 2022,
before adjusting entries, the balances in selected accounts were Accounts Receivable
€250,000 debit, and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts €2,400 credit. If Wilton
estimates that 8% of its receivables will prove to be uncollectible, prepare the
December 31, 2022, journal entry to record bad debt expense.
BE7.6 (LO 3) Use the information presented in BE7.5 for Wilton, AG.
a. Instead of an Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Balance of €2,400 credit, the
balance was €1,900 debit. Assume that 10% of accounts receivable will prove to
be uncollectible. Prepare the entry to record bad debt expense.
b. Instead of estimating uncollectibles based on a percentage of receivables, assume
Wilton prepares an aging schedule that estimates total uncollectible accounts at
€24,600. (Assume an allowance of €2,400 credit.) Prepare the entry to record bad
debt expense.
BE7.7 (LO 4) Milner Family Importers sold goods to Tung Decorators for $30,000
on November 1, 2022, accepting Tung’s $30,000, 6-month, 6% note. Prepare Milner’s
November 1 entry, December 31 annual adjusting entry, and May 1, 2023, entry for the
collection of the note and interest.
BE7.8 (LO 4) On January 1, 2022, Deng Acrobats lent NT$16,529 to Donaldson, Inc.,
accepting Donaldson’s 2-year, NT$20,000, zero-interest-bearing note. The implied
interest rate is 10%. Prepare Deng’s journal entries for the initial transaction,
recognition of interest each year, and the collection of NT$20,000 at maturity.
BE7.9 (LO 4) Modest Mouse SE had the following information related to an account
receivable from Counting Crows Inc. Initial face value, €22,000; payments received,
€3,000; provision for uncollectibility, €5,000. Determine the cash realizable value for
the Counting Crows receivable.
BE7.10 (LO 5) On October 1, 2022, Chung Group assigns ¥1,000,000 of its accounts
receivable to Seneca National Bank as collateral for a ¥750,000 note. The bank
assesses a finance charge of 2% of the receivables assigned and interest on the note of
9%. Prepare the October 1, 2022, journal entries for both Chung and Seneca.
BE7.11 (LO 5) Wood SA factored €150,000 of accounts receivable with Engram
Factors, without guarantee of credit loss. Engram assesses a 2% finance charge of the
amount of accounts receivable and retains an amount equal to 6% of accounts
receivable for possible adjustments. Prepare the journal entry for Wood SA and
Engram Factors to record the factoring of the accounts receivable to Engram.

--- Page 582 ---
BE7.12 (LO 5) Use the information in BE7.11 for Wood SA. Assume that the
receivables are sold with recourse (guarantee). Prepare the journal entry for Wood to
record the sale.
BE7.13 (LO 5) Arness Woodcrafters sells $250,000 of receivables to Commercial
Factors, Inc. on a without guarantee basis. Commercial assesses a finance charge of
5% and retains an amount equal to 4% of accounts receivable. Prepare the journal
entry for Arness to record the sale.
BE7.14 (LO 5) Use the information presented in BE7.13 for Arness Woodcrafters but
assume that the receivables were sold with a full guarantee for credit losses. Prepare
the journal entry and discuss the effects on Arness’s financial statements.
BE7.15 (LO 5) Recent financial statements of adidas (DEU) report net sales of
€21,915 million. Accounts receivable (net) are €2,410 million at the beginning of the
year and €2,315 million at the end of the year. Compute adidas’s accounts receivable
turnover. Compute adidas’s average collection period for accounts receivable in days.
*BE7.16 (LO 6) Finman plc designated Jill Holland as petty cash custodian and
established a petty cash fund of £200. The fund is reimbursed when the cash in the
fund is at £15. Petty cash receipts indicate funds were disbursed for office supplies
£94 and miscellaneous expense £87. Prepare journal entries for the establishment of
the fund and the reimbursement.
*BE7.17 (LO 6) Horton Corporation is preparing a bank reconciliation and has
identified the following potential reconciling items. For each item, indicate if it is (1)
added to balance per bank statement, (2) deducted from balance per bank statement,
(3) added to balance per books, or (4) deducted from balance per books.
a. Deposit in transit $5,500.
b. Bank service charges $25.
c. Interest credited to Horton’s account $31.
d. Outstanding checks $7,422.
e. NSF check returned $377.
*BE7.18 (LO 6) Use the information presented in BE7.17 for Horton Corporation.
Prepare any entries necessary to make Horton’s accounting records correct and
complete.
Exercises
E7.1 (LO 1) (Determine Cash Balance) The controller for Wallaby plc is
attempting to determine the amount of cash and cash equivalents to be reported on
its December 31, 2022, statement of financial position. The following information is
provided.

--- Page 583 ---
1. Commercial savings account of £600,000 and a commercial checking account
balance of £800,000 are held at First National Bank of Olathe.
2. Money market fund account held at Volonte Co. (a mutual fund organization)
permits Wallaby to write checks on this balance, £5,000,000.
3. Travel advances of £180,000 for executive travel for the first quarter of next year
(employee to reimburse through salary reduction).
4. A separate cash fund in the amount of £1,500,000 is restricted for the retirement
of long-term debt.
5. Petty cash fund of £1,000.
6. An I.O.U. from Marianne Koch, a company customer, in the amount of £150,000.
7. A bank overdraft of £110,000 has occurred at one of the banks the company uses
to deposit its cash receipts. At the present time, the company has no deposits at
this bank.
8. The company has two certificates of deposit, each totaling £500,000. These CDs
have a maturity of 120 days.
9. Wallaby has received a check from a customer that is dated January 12, 2023, in
the amount of £125,000.
10. Wallaby has agreed to maintain a cash balance of £500,000 at all times at First
National Bank of Olathe to ensure future credit availability.
11. Wallaby has purchased £2,100,000 of commercial paper of Sergio Leone Co.
which is due in 60 days.
12. Currency and coin on hand amounted to £7,700.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of cash (and cash equivalents) to be reported on Wallaby
plc’s statement of financial position at December 31, 2022.
b. Indicate the proper reporting for items that are not reported as cash on the
December 31, 2022, statement of financial position.
E7.2 (LO 1) (Determine Cash Balance) The following are independent situations.
1. Checking account balance $925,000; certificate of deposit $1,400,000; cash
advance to subsidiary of $980,000; utility deposit paid to gas company $180.
2. Checking account balance $500,000; an overdraft in special checking account at
same bank as normal checking account of $17,000; cash held in a bond sinking
fund $200,000; petty cash fund $300; coins and currency on hand $1,350.
3. Checking account balance $590,000; postdated check from customer $11,000;
cash restricted due to maintaining compensating balance requirement of
$100,000; certified check from customer $9,800; postage stamps on hand $620.

--- Page 584 ---
4. Checking account balance at bank $42,000; money market balance at mutual
fund (has checking privileges) $48,000; NSF check received from customer $800.
5. Checking account balance $700,000; cash restricted for future plant expansion
$500,000; short-term Treasury bills $180,000; cash advance received from
customer $900 (not included in checking account balance); cash advance of
$7,000 to company executive, payable on demand; refundable deposit of $26,000
paid to the government to guarantee performance on construction contract.
Instructions
For each individual situation, determine the amount that should be reported as cash.
If the item(s) is not reported as cash, explain the rationale.
E7.3 (LO 2) (Financial Statement Presentation of Receivables) Pique AG
shows a balance of €241,140 in the Accounts Receivable account on December 31,
2022. The balance consists of the following.
Installment accounts due in 2023
€23,000
Installment accounts due after 2023 (within the operating cycle)
34,000
Overpayments to creditors
2,640
Due from regular customers, of which €40,000 represents accounts pledged
as security for a bank loan
89,000
Advances to employees
1,500
Advance to subsidiary company (made in 2020)
91,000
Instructions
Illustrate how the information should be shown on the statement of financial position
of Pique AG on December 31, 2022.
E7.4 (LO 2) (Determine Ending Accounts Receivable) Your accounts receivable
clerk, Mary Herman, to whom you pay a salary of $1,500 per month, has just
purchased a new Audi. You decided to test the accuracy of the accounts receivable
balance of $117,000 as shown in the ledger.
The following information is available for your first year in business.
1. Collections from customers
$198,000
2. Merchandise purchased
320,000
3. Ending merchandise inventory
70,000
4. Goods are marked to sell at 40% above cost
Instructions
Compute an estimate of the ending balance of accounts receivable from customers
that should appear in the ledger and any apparent shortages. Assume that all sales are
made on account.

--- Page 585 ---
E7.5 (LO 2) (Recording Sales Gross and Net) On June 3, Bolton plc sold to
Arquette Company merchandise having a sales price of £2,000 with terms of 2/10,
n/60. An invoice totaling £90, terms n/30, was received by Arquette on June 8 from
John Booth Transport Service for the freight cost. On June 12, the company received a
check for the balance due from Arquette Company.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries on the Bolton plc books to record sales and receivables for
all the events noted above under each of the following bases.
1. Sales and receivables are entered at gross selling price.
2. Sales and receivables are entered at net of cash discounts.
b. Prepare the journal entry under basis (a)(2), assuming that Arquette Company
did not remit payment until July 29.
E7.6 (LO 2) (Recording Sales Transactions) Presented below is information
from Lopez Computers.
July
1 Sold R$30,000 of computers to Smallwood Company with terms 3/15, n/60.
Lopez uses the gross method to record cash discounts.
10 Lopez received payment from Smallwood for the full amount owed from the
July transactions.
17 Sold R$250,000 in computers and peripherals to The Hernandez Store with
terms of 2/10, n/30.
30 The Hernandez Store paid Lopez for its purchase of July 17.
Instructions
Prepare the necessary journal entries for Lopez Computers.
E7.7 (LO 3) (Recording Bad Debts) Duncan SA reports the following financial
information before adjustments.
Dr.
Cr.
Accounts Receivable
€100,000
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
€
 2,000
Sales Revenue
900,000
Instructions
Prepare the journal entry to record bad debt expense assuming Duncan estimates bad
debts at (a) 5% of accounts receivable and (b) 5% of accounts receivable, and the
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts has a €1,500 debit balance.
E7.8 (LO 3) (Recording Bad Debts) At the end of 2022, Sorter plc has accounts
receivable of £900,000 and an allowance for doubtful accounts of £40,000. On

--- Page 586 ---
January 16, 2023, Sorter determined that its receivable from Ordonez Orchards of
£8,000 will not be collected, and management authorized its write-off.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for Sorter plc to write off the Ordonez receivable.
b. What is the cash realizable value of Sorter plc’s accounts receivable before the
write-off of the Ordonez receivable?
c. What is the cash realizable value of Sorter plc’s accounts receivable after the
write-off of the Ordonez receivable?
E7.9 (LO 3) (Computing Bad Debts and Preparing Journal Entries) The trial
balance before adjustment of Estefan Inc. shows the following balances.
Dr.
Cr.
Accounts Receivable
$80,000
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
1,750
Sales Revenue
$580,000
Instructions
Give the entry for estimated bad debts assuming that the allowance is to provide for
doubtful accounts on the basis of (a) 4% of gross accounts receivable and (b) 5% of
gross accounts receivable, and the Allowance for Doubtful accounts has a $1,700
credit balance.
E7.10 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Reporting) The chief accountant for Dickinson
Corporation provides you with the following list of accounts receivable written off in
the current year.
Date
Customer
Amount
March 31
E. L. Masters Company
$7,800
June 30
Stephen Crane Associates
9,700
September 30 Amy Lowell’s Dress Shop
7,000
December 31 R. Frost, Inc.
9,830
Dickinson follows the policy of debiting Bad Debt Expense as accounts are written off.
The chief accountant maintains that this procedure is appropriate for financial
statement purposes because the tax authority will not accept other methods for
recognizing bad debts.
All of Dickinson’s sales are on a 30-day credit basis. Sales for the current year total
$2,200,000. The balance in Accounts Receivable at year-end is $77,000 and an
analysis of customer risk and charge-off experience indicates that 12% of receivables
will be uncollectible (assume a zero balance in the allowance).
Instructions

--- Page 587 ---
a. Do you agree or disagree with Dickinson’s policy concerning recognition of bad
debt expense? Why or why not?
b. By what amount would net income differ if bad debt expense was computed using
the percentage-of-receivables approach?
E7.11 (LO 3) (Bad Debts—Aging) Puckett, AG includes the following account
among its trade receivable (amounts in dollars).
Alstott Co.
1/1
Balance forward
700 1/28
Cash (#1710)
1,100
1/20
Invoice #1710
1,100 4/2
Cash (#2116)
1,350
3/14
Invoice #2116
1,350 4/10
Cash (1/1 Balance)
255
4/12
Invoice #2412
1,710 4/30 Cash (#2412)
1,000
9/5
Invoice #3614
490 9/20 Cash (#3614 and part of #2412)
890
10/17 Invoice #4912
860 10/31 Cash (#4912)
860
11/18 Invoice #5681
2,000 12/1
Cash (#5681)
1,250
12/20 Invoice #6347
800 12/29 Cash (#6347)
800
Instructions
Age the balance and specify any items that apparently require particular attention at
year-end.
E7.12 (LO 2, 3, 5) (Journalizing Various Receivable Transactions) The
following information is related to Sanford SA.
July
1 Sanford SA sold to Legler Co. merchandise having a sales price of €10,000
with terms 2/10, net/60. Sanford records its sales and receivables net.
5 Accounts receivable of €12,000 (gross) are factored with Rothchild Credit
without guarantee at a financing charge of 9%. Cash is received for the
proceeds; collections are handled by the finance company. (These accounts
were all past the discount period.)
9 Specific accounts receivable of €9,000 (gross) are pledged to Rather Credit
Corp. as security for a loan of €6,000 at a finance charge of 6% of the
amount of the loan. The finance company will make the collections. (All the
accounts receivable are past the discount period.)
Dec. 29 Legler Co. notifies Sanford that it is bankrupt and will pay only 10% of its
account. Give the entry to write off the uncollectible balance using the
allowance method. (Note: First record the increase in the receivable on July
11 when the discount period passed.)
31 Sanford conducts an individual assessment of a note receivable with a
carrying value of €350,000. Sanford determines the present value of the
note is €275,000.

--- Page 588 ---
Instructions
Prepare all necessary entries in general journal form for Sanford SA.
E7.13 (LO 4) (Notes Transactions at Unrealistic Interest Rates) On July 1,
2022, Rentoul plc made two sales.
1. It sold land having a fair value of £900,000 in exchange for a 4-year, zero-
interest-bearing promissory note in the face amount of £1,416,163. The land is
carried on Rentoul’s books at a cost of £590,000.
2. It rendered services in exchange for a 3%, 8-year promissory note having a face
value of £400,000 (interest payable annually).
Rentoul recently had to pay 8% interest for money that it borrowed from British
National Bank. The customers in these two transactions have credit ratings that
require them to borrow money at 12% interest.
Instructions
Record the two journal entries that should be recorded by Rentoul plc for the sales
transactions above that took place on July 1, 2022.
E7.14 (LO 4) (Notes Receivable with Unrealistic Interest Rate) On December
31, 2022, Hurly Co. performed environmental consulting services for Cascade Co.
Cascade was short of cash, and Hurly Co. agreed to accept a $300,000 zero-interest-
bearing note due December 31, 2024, as payment in full. Cascade is somewhat of a
credit risk and typically borrows funds at a rate of 10%. Hurly is much more
creditworthy and has various lines of credit at 6%.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the transaction of December 31, 2022, for
Hurly Co.
b. Assuming Hurly Co.’s fiscal year-end is December 31, prepare the journal entry
for December 31, 2023.
c. Assuming Hurly Co.’s fiscal year-end is December 31, prepare the journal entry
for December 31, 2024.
E7.15 (LO 5) (Assigning Accounts Receivable) On April 1, 2022, Prince
Company assigns $500,000 of its accounts receivable to the Hibernia Bank as
collateral for a $300,000 loan due July 1, 2022. The assignment agreement calls for
Prince Company to continue to collect the receivables. Hibernia Bank assesses a
finance charge of 2% of the accounts receivable, and interest on the loan is 10% (a
realistic rate of interest for a note of this type).
Instructions
a. Prepare the April 1, 2022, journal entry for Prince Company.

--- Page 589 ---
b. Prepare the journal entry for Prince’s collection of $350,000 of the accounts
receivable during the period from April 1, 2022, through June 30, 2022.
c. On July 1, 2022, Prince paid Hibernia all that was due from the loan it secured on
April 1, 2022. Prepare the journal entry to record this payment.
E7.16 (LO 3, 5) (Journalizing Various Receivable Transactions) The trial
balance before adjustment for Misumi Ltd. shows the following balances (amounts in
thousands).
Dr.
Cr.
Accounts Receivable
¥82,000
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
1,750
Sales Revenue
¥430,000
Instructions
Using the data above, give the journal entries required to record each of the following
cases. (Each situation is independent.)
1. To obtain additional cash, Misumi factors without guarantee of credit loss
¥20,000 of accounts receivable with Stills Finance. The finance charge is 10% of
the amount factored.
2. To obtain a one-year loan of ¥55,000, Misumi assigns ¥65,000 of specific
receivable accounts to Obihiro Financial. The finance charge is 8% of the loan;
the cash is received and the accounts turned over to Obihiro Financial.
3. The company wants to maintain Allowance for Doubtful Accounts at 5% of gross
accounts receivable.
4. Based on an aging analysis, an allowance of ¥5,800 should be reported. Assume
the allowance has a credit balance of ¥1,100.
E7.17 (LO 5) (Transfer of Receivables with Guarantee) Bryant Ltd. factors
receivables with a carrying amount of £200,000 to Warren Company for £190,000
and guarantees all credit losses.
Instructions
Prepare the appropriate journal entry to record this transaction on the books of
Bryant Ltd.
E7.18 (LO 5) (Transfer of Receivables without Guarantee) Bohannon SA
factors €250,000 of accounts receivable with Winkler Financing, on a without
guarantee (no recourse) basis. Winkler Financing will collect the receivables. The
receivables records are transferred to Winkler Financing on August 15, 2022. Winkler
Financing assesses a finance charge of 2% of the amount of accounts receivable and
also reserves an amount equal to 4% of accounts receivable to cover probable
adjustments.

--- Page 590 ---
Instructions
a. What conditions must be met for a transfer of receivables with guarantee to be
accounted for as a sale?
b. Assume the conditions from part (a) are met. Prepare the journal entry on August
15, 2022, for Bohannon to record the sale of receivables.
E7.19 (LO 5) (Transfer of Receivables without Guarantee) SEK Group factors
¥400,000 of accounts receivable with Mays Finance without guaranteeing any
payment for possible credit losses (without recourse) on July 1, 2022. The receivables
records are transferred to Mays Finance, which will receive the collections. Mays
Finance assesses a finance charge of 1½% of the amount of accounts receivable and
retains an amount equal to 4% of accounts receivable to cover sales discounts,
returns, and allowances. The transaction is to be recorded as a sale.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry on July 1, 2022, for SEK Group to record the sale of
receivables without recourse.
b. Prepare the journal entry on July 1, 2022, for Mays Finance to record the
purchase of receivables without recourse.
E7.20 (LO 2, 5) (Analysis of Receivables) The following information is for Grant
AG.
1. Beginning-of-the-year Accounts Receivable balance was €15,000.
2. Net sales (all on account) for the year were €100,000. Grant does not offer cash
discounts.
3. Collections on accounts receivable during the year were €80,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare (summary) journal entries to record the items noted above.
b. Compute Grant’s accounts receivable turnover for the year. The company does
not believe it will have any bad debts.
c. Use the turnover ratio computed in (b) to analyze Grant’s liquidity. The turnover
ratio last year was 7.0.
E7.21 (LO 5) (Transfer of Receivables) Use the information for Grant AG as
presented in E7.20. Grant is planning to factor some accounts receivable at the end of
the year. Accounts totaling €10,000 will be transferred to Credit Factors without
guarantee. Credit Factors will retain 5% of the balances for probable adjustments and
assesses a finance charge of 4%.
Instructions

--- Page 591 ---
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the sale of the receivables.
b. Compute Grant’s accounts receivable turnover for the year, assuming the
receivables are sold. Discuss how factoring of receivables affects the turnover
ratio.
*E7.22 (LO 6) (Petty Cash) McMann, Inc. decided to establish a petty cash fund to
help ensure internal control over its small cash expenditures. The following
information is available for the month of April.
1. On April 1, it established a petty cash fund in the amount of $200.
2. A summary of the petty cash expenditures made by the petty cash custodian as of
April 10 is as follows.
Delivery charges paid on merchandise purchased $60
Supplies purchased and used
25
Postage expense
40
I.O.U. from employees
17
Miscellaneous expense
36
The petty cash fund was replenished on April 10. The balance in the fund was $12.
3. The petty cash fund balance was increased $100 to $300 on April 20.
Instructions
Prepare the journal entries to record transactions related to petty cash for the month
of April.
*E7.23 (LO 6) (Petty Cash) The petty cash fund of Teasdale’s Auto Repair Service, a
sole proprietorship, contains the following.
1. Coins and currency
$ 10.20
2. Postage stamps
7.90
3. An I.O.U. from Richie Cunningham, an employee, for cash
advance
40.00
4. Check payable to Teasdale’s Auto Repair from Pottsie Weber, an
employee, marked NSF
34.00
5. Vouchers for the following:
Stamps
$ 20.00
Two Premier Cup tickets for Nick Teasdale
170.00
Printer cleaning
14.35
204.35
$296.45
The general ledger account Petty Cash has a balance of $300.

--- Page 592 ---
Instructions
Prepare the journal entry to record the reimbursement of the petty cash fund.
*E7.24 (LO 6) (Bank Reconciliation and Adjusting Entries) Kipling plc
deposits all receipts and makes all payments by check. The following information is
available from the cash records.
June 30 Bank Reconciliation
Balance per bank
£7,000
Add: Deposits in transit
1,540
Deduct: Outstanding checks
2,000
Balance per books
£6,540
Month of July Results
Per
Bank
Per
Books
Balance July 31
£8,650
£9,250
July deposits
4,500
5,810
July checks
4,000
3,100
July note collected (not included in July deposits)
1,500
—
July bank service charge
15
—
July NSF check from a customer, returned by the bank (recorded by
bank as a charge)
335
—
Instructions
a. Prepare a bank reconciliation going from balance per bank and balance per book
to correct the cash balance.
b. Prepare the general journal entry or entries to correct the Cash account.
*E7.25 (LO 6) (Bank Reconciliation and Adjusting Entries) Aragon Company
has just received the August 31, 2022, bank statement, which is summarized below.
County National Bank
Disbursements Receipts Balance
Balance, August 1
$ 9,369
Deposits during August
$32,200
41,569
Note collected for depositor, including $40 interest
1,040 42,609
Checks cleared during August
$34,500
8,109
Bank service charges
20
8,089
Balance, August 31
8,089

--- Page 593 ---
The general ledger Cash account contained the following entries for the month of
August.
Cash
Balance, August 1
10,050 Disbursements in August 35,403
Receipts during August 35,000
Deposits in transit at August 31 are $3,800, and checks outstanding at August 31 total
$1,550. Cash on hand at August 31 is $310. The bookkeeper improperly entered one
check in the books at $146.50 which was written for $164.50 for supplies (expense); it
cleared the bank during the month of August.
Instructions
a. Prepare a bank reconciliation dated August 31, 2022, proceeding to a correct
balance.
b. Prepare any entries necessary to make the books correct and complete.
c. What amount of cash should be reported in the August 31 statement of financial
position?
Problems
P7.1 (LO 1) (Determine Proper Cash Balance) Francis Equipment AG closes its
books regularly on December 31, but at the end of 2022 it held its cash account open
so that a more favorable statement of financial position could be prepared for credit
purposes. Cash receipts and disbursements for the first 10 days of January were
recorded as December transactions. The information is given below.
1. January cash receipts recorded in the December cash account totaled €45,640, of
which €28,000 represents cash sales, and €17,640 represents collections on
account for which cash discounts of €360 were given.
2. January cash disbursements recorded in the December check register liquidated
accounts payable of €22,450 on which discounts of €250 were taken.
3. The ledger has not been closed for 2022.
4. The amount shown as inventory was determined by physical count on December
31, 2022.
The company uses the periodic method of inventory.
Instructions
a. Prepare any entries you consider necessary to correct Francis’s accounts at
December 31.
b. To what extent was Francis Equipment AG able to show a more favorable
statement of financial position at December 31 by holding its cash book open?

--- Page 594 ---
(Compute working capital and the current ratio.) Assume that the statement of
financial position that was prepared by the company showed the following
amounts:
Dr.
Cr.
Cash
€39,000
Accounts receivable
42,000
Inventory
67,000
Accounts payable
€45,000
Other current liabilities
14,200
P7.2 (LO 3) 
 (Bad-Debt Reporting) The following are a series of
unrelated situations.
1. Halen Company’s unadjusted trial balance at December 31, 2022, included the
following accounts.
Debit
Credit
Accounts receivable
$53,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts
4,000
Net sales
$1,200,000
Halen Company estimates its bad debt expense to be 7% of gross accounts
receivable. Determine its bad debt expense for 2022.
2. An analysis and aging of Stuart Corp. accounts receivable at December 31, 2022,
disclosed the following.
Amounts estimated to be uncollectible
$  180,000
Accounts receivable
1,750,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts (per books)
125,000
What is the cash realizable value of Stuart’s receivables at December 31, 2022?
3. Shore Co. provides for doubtful accounts based on 4% of gross accounts
receivable, which had a balance of $1,500,000 at year-end. The following data are
available for 2022.
Credit sales during 2022
$4,400,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts 1/1/22
17,000
Collection of accounts written off in prior years (customer credit
was reestablished)
8,000
Customer accounts written off as uncollectible during 2022
30,000
What is the balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts at December 31, 2022?

--- Page 595 ---
4. At the end of its first year of operations, December 31, 2022, Darden Inc. reported
the following information.
Accounts receivable, net of allowance for doubtful accounts $950,000
Customer accounts written off as uncollectible during 2022
24,000
Bad debt expense for 2022
84,000
What should be the balance in accounts receivable at December 31, 2022, before
subtracting the allowance for doubtful accounts?
5. The following accounts were taken from Bullock Inc.’s trial balance at December
31, 2022.
Debit
Credit
Net credit sales
$750,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts $ 14,000
Accounts receivable
310,000
If doubtful accounts are 3% of accounts receivable, determine the bad debt
expense to be reported for 2022.
Instructions
Answer the questions relating to each of the five independent situations as requested.
P7.3 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Reporting—Aging) Manilow Corporation operates in an
industry that has a high rate of bad debts. Before any year-end adjustments, the
balance in Manilow’s Accounts Receivable was $555,000 and Allowance for Doubtful
Accounts had a credit balance of $40,000. The year-end balance reported in the
statement of financial position for Allowance for Doubtful Accounts will be based on
the following aging schedule.
Days Account Outstanding Amount Probability of Collection
Less than 16 days
$300,000
.98
16–30 days
100,000
.90
31–45 days
80,000
.85
46–60 days
40,000
.80
61–75 days
20,000
.55
Over 75 days
15,000
.00
Instructions
a. What is the appropriate balance for Allowance for Doubtful Accounts at year-
end?

--- Page 596 ---
b. Show how accounts receivable would be presented on the statement of financial
position.
c. What is the dollar effect of the year-end bad debt adjustment on the before-tax
income?
P7.4 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Reporting) From inception of operations to December 31,
2022, Fortner plc provided for uncollectible accounts receivable under the allowance
method. The provisions are recorded based on analysis of customers with different
risk characteristics. Bad debts written off were charged to the allowance account;
recoveries of bad debts previously written off were credited to the allowance account;
and no year-end adjustments to the allowance account were made. Fortner’s usual
credit terms are net 30 days.
The balance in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts was £130,000 at January 1, 2022.
During 2022, credit sales totaled £9,000,000, the provision for doubtful accounts was
determined to be £180,000, £90,000 of bad debts were written off, and recoveries of
accounts previously written off amounted to £15,000. Fortner installed a computer
system in November 2022, and an aging of accounts receivable was prepared for the
first time as of December 31, 2022. A summary of the aging is as follows.
Classification by Month of Sale Balance in Each Category Estimated %Uncollectible
November–December 2022
£1,080,000
2%
July–October
650,000
10%
January–June
420,000
25%
Prior to 1/1/22
150,000
80%
£2,300,000
Based on the review of collectibility of the account balances in the “prior to 1/1/22”
aging category, additional receivables totaling £60,000 were written off as of
December 31, 2022. The 80% uncollectible estimate applies to the remaining £90,000
in the category. Effective with the year ended December 31, 2022, Fortner adopted a
different method for estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts at the amount
indicated by the year-end aging analysis of accounts receivable.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule analyzing the changes in Allowance for Doubtful Accounts for
the year ended December 31, 2022. Show supporting computations in good form.
(Hint: In computing the 12/31/22 allowance, subtract the £60,000 write-off.)
b. Prepare the journal entry for the year-end adjustment to the Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts balance as of December 31, 2022.
P7.5 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Reporting) The following is information related to the
Accounts Receivable accounts of Gulistan AG during the current year 2022.

--- Page 597 ---
1. An aging schedule of the accounts receivable as of December 31, 2022, is as
follows.
Age
Net Debit
Balance
% to Be Applied after Correction Is Made
Under 60
days
€172,342
1%
60–90
days
136,490
3%
91–120
days
39,924*
6%
Over 120
days
23,644
€3,700 definitely uncollectible; estimated remainder
uncollectible is 25%
€372,400
*The €3,240 write-off of receivables is related to the 91-to-120 day category.
2. The Accounts Receivable account has a debit balance of €372,400 on December
31, 2022.
3. Two entries were made in the Bad Debt Expense account during the year: (1) a
debit on December 31 for the amount credited to Allowance for Doubtful
Accounts, and (2) a credit for €3,240 on November 3, 2022, and a debit to
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts because of a bankruptcy.
4. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts is as follows for 2022.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Nov. 3 Uncollectible accounts
Jan. 1
Beginning balance
8,750
written off
3,240 Dec. 31 5% of €372,400
18,620
5. A credit balance exists in Accounts Receivable (60–90 days) of €4,840, which
represents an advance on a sales contract.
Instructions
Assuming that the books have not been closed for 2022, make the necessary
correcting entries.
P7.6 (LO 2, 3) (Journalize Various Accounts Receivable Transactions) The
statement of financial position of Stancia SA at December 31, 2021, includes the
following (in thousands).
Notes receivable
R$ 36,000
Accounts receivable
182,100
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
17,300 R$200,800
Transactions in 2022 include the following.

--- Page 598 ---
1. Accounts receivable of R$138,000 were collected including accounts of R$60,000
on which 2% sales discounts were allowed.
2. R$5,300 was received in payment of an account which was written off the books
as worthless in 2022. (Hint: Reestablish the receivable account.)
3. Customer accounts of R$17,500 were written off during the year.
4. At year-end, Allowance for Doubtful Accounts was estimated to need a balance of
R$20,000. This estimate is based on an analysis of aged accounts receivable.
Instructions
Prepare all journal entries necessary to reflect the transactions above.
P7.7 (LO 4) (Notes Receivable with Realistic Interest Rate) On October 1,
2022, Arden Farm Equipment Company sold a pecan-harvesting machine to Valco
Brothers Farm. In lieu of a cash payment Valco Brothers Farm gave Arden a 2-year,
$120,000, 8% note (a realistic rate of interest for a note of this type). The note
required interest to be paid annually on October 1. Arden’s financial statements are
prepared on a calendar-year basis.
Instructions
Assuming Valco Brothers Farm fulfills all the terms of the note, prepare the necessary
journal entries for Arden Farm Equipment Company for the entire term of the note.
P7.8 (LO 4) (Notes Receivable Journal Entries) On December 31, 2022, Regent
plc rendered services to Begin Group at an agreed price of £102,049, accepting
£40,000 down and agreeing to accept the balance in four equal installments of
£20,000 receivable each December 31. An assumed interest rate of 11% is imputed.
Instructions
Prepare the entries that would be recorded by Regent plc for the sale and for the
receipts and interest on the following dates. (Assume that the effective-interest
method is used for amortization purposes.)
a. December 31, 2022.
b. December 31, 2023.
c. December 31, 2024.
d. December 31, 2025.
e. December 31, 2026.
P7.9 (LO 4) (Comprehensive Receivables Problem) Braddock Inc. had the
following long-term receivable account balances at December 31, 2021.
Note receivable from sale of division $1,500,000
Note receivable from officer
400,000

--- Page 599 ---
Transactions during 2022 and other information relating to Braddock’s long-term
receivables were as follows.
1. The $1,500,000 note receivable is dated May 1, 2021, bears interest at 9%, and
represents the balance of the consideration received from the sale of Braddock’s
electronics division to New York Company. Principal payments of $500,000 plus
appropriate interest are due on May 1, 2022, 2023, and 2024. The first principal
and interest payment was made on May 1, 2022. Collection of the note
installments is reasonably assured.
2. The $400,000 note receivable is dated December 31, 2021, bears interest at 8%,
and is due on December 31, 2024. The note is due from Sean May, president of
Braddock Inc., and is collateralized by 10,000 of Braddock’s ordinary shares.
Interest is payable annually on December 31, and all interest payments were paid
on their due dates through December 31, 2022. The quoted market price of
Braddock’s ordinary shares was $45 per share on December 31, 2022.
3. On April 1, 2022, Braddock sold a patent to Pennsylvania Company in exchange
for a $100,000 zero-interest-bearing note due on April 1, 2024. There was no
established exchange price for the patent, and the note had no ready market. The
prevailing rate of interest for a note of this type at April 1, 2022, was 12%. The
present value of $1 for two periods at 12% is 0.797 (use this factor). The patent
had a carrying value of $40,000 at January 1, 2022, and the amortization for the
year ended December 31, 2022, would have been $8,000. The collection of the
note receivable from Pennsylvania is reasonably assured.
4. On July 1, 2022, Braddock sold a parcel of land to Splinter Company for $200,000
under an installment sale contract. Splinter made a $60,000 cash down payment
on July 1, 2022, and signed a 4-year 11% note for the $140,000 balance. The equal
annual payments of principal and interest on the note will be $45,125 payable on
July 1, 2023, through July 1, 2026. The land could have been sold at an
established cash price of $200,000. The cost of the land to Braddock was
$150,000. Circumstances are such that the collection of the installments on the
note is reasonably assured.
Instructions
a. Prepare the long-term receivables section of Braddock’s statement of financial
position at December 31, 2022.
b. Prepare a schedule showing the current portion of the long-term receivables and
accrued interest receivable that would appear in Braddock’s statement of
financial position at December 31, 2022.
c. Prepare a schedule showing interest revenue from the long-term receivables that
would appear on Braddock’s income statement for the year ended December 31,
2022.

--- Page 600 ---
P7.10 (LO 5) (Assigned Accounts Receivable—Journal Entries) Salen Ltd.
finances some of its current operations by assigning accounts receivable to a finance
company. On July 1, 2022, it assigned, under guarantee, specific accounts amounting
to ¥150,000,000. The finance company advanced to Salen 80% of the accounts
assigned (20% of the total to be withheld until the finance company has made its full
recovery), less a finance charge of ½% of the total accounts assigned.
On July 31, Salen Ltd. received a statement that the finance company had collected
¥80,000,000 of these accounts and had made an additional charge of ½% of the total
accounts outstanding as of July 31. This charge is to be deducted at the time of the
first remittance due Salen from the finance company. (Hint: Make entries at this
time.) On August 31, 2022, Salen received a second statement from the finance
company, together with a check for the amount due. The statement indicated that the
finance company had collected an additional ¥50,000,000 and had made a further
charge of ½% of the balance outstanding as of August 31.
Instructions
Make all entries on the books of Salen Ltd. that are involved in the transactions above.
P7.11 (LO 5) 
 (Income Effects of Receivables Transactions)
Sandburg Mining requires additional cash for its business. Sandburg has decided to
use its accounts receivable to raise the additional cash and has asked you to determine
the income statement effects of the following contemplated transactions.
1. On July 1, 2022, Sandburg assigned €400,000 of accounts receivable to Keller
Finance Company. Sandburg received an advance from Keller of 80% of the
assigned accounts receivable less a commission of 3% on the advance. Prior to
December 31, 2022, Sandburg collected €220,000 on the assigned accounts
receivable, and remitted €232,720 to Keller, €12,720 of which represented
interest on the advance from Keller.
2. On December 1, 2022, Sandburg sold €300,000 of net accounts receivable to
Wunsch Company for €270,000. The receivables were sold outright on a without
guarantee (recourse) basis.
3. On December 31, 2022, Sandburg received an advance of €120,000 from First
Bank by pledging €160,000 of its accounts receivable. Sandburg’s first payment to
First Bank is due on January 30, 2023.
Instructions
Prepare a schedule showing the income statement effects for the year ended
December 31, 2022, as a result of the above facts.
*P7.12 (LO 6) (Petty Cash, Bank Reconciliation) Bill Jovi is reviewing the cash
accounting for Nottleman, plc, a local mailing service. Jovi’s review will focus on the
petty cash account and the bank reconciliation for the month ended May 31, 2022. He
has collected the following information from Nottleman’s bookkeeper for this task.

--- Page 601 ---
Petty Cash
1. The petty cash fund was established on May 10, 2022, in the amount of £250.
2. Expenditures from the fund by the custodian as of May 31, 2022, were evidenced
by approved receipts for the following.
Postage expense
£33.00
Mailing labels and other supplies
65.00
I.O.U. from employees
30.00
Shipping charges
57.45
Newspaper advertising
22.80
Miscellaneous expense
15.35
On May 31, 2022, the petty cash fund was replenished and increased to £300;
currency and coin in the fund at that time totaled £26.40.
Bank Reconciliation
Shire Bank 
Bank Statement
Disbursements Receipts Balance
Balance, May 1, 2022
£8,769
Deposits
£28,000
Note payment direct from customer (interest of
£30)
930
Checks cleared during May
£31,150
Bank service charges
27
Balance, May 31, 2022
6,522
Nottleman’s Cash Account
Balance, May 1, 2022
£ 8,850
Deposits during May 2022
31,000
Checks written during May 2022 (31,835)
Deposits in transit are determined to be £3,000, and checks outstanding at May 31
total £850. Cash on hand (besides petty cash) at May 31, 2022, is £246.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record the transactions related to the petty cash
fund for May.

--- Page 602 ---
b. Prepare a bank reconciliation dated May 31, 2022, proceeding to a correct cash
balance, and prepare the journal entries necessary to make the books correct and
complete.
c. What amount of cash should be reported in the May 31, 2022, statement of
financial position?
*P7.13 (LO 6) (Bank Reconciliation and Adjusting Entries) The Cash account
of Aguilar Co. showed a ledger balance of $3,969.85 on June 30, 2022. The bank
statement as of that date showed a balance of $4,150. Upon comparing the statement
with the cash records, the following facts were determined.
1. There were bank service charges for June of $25.
2. A bank memo stated that Bao Dai’s note for $1,200 and interest of $36 had been
collected on June 29, and the bank had made a charge of $5.50 on the collection.
(No entry had been made on Aguilar’s books when Bao Dai’s note was sent to the
bank for collection.)
3. Receipts for June 30 for $3,390 were not deposited until July 2.
4. Checks outstanding on June 30 totaled $2,136.05.
5. The bank had reduced Aguilar Co.’s account for a customer’s uncollectible check
amounting to $253.20 on June 29.
6. A customer’s check for $90 (payment on account) had been entered as $60 in the
cash receipts journal by Aguilar on June 15.
7. Check no. 742 in the amount of $491 had been entered in the cash journal as
$419, and check no. 747 in the amount of $58.20 had been entered as $582. Both
checks had been issued to pay for purchases of equipment.
Instructions
a. Prepare a bank reconciliation dated June 30, 2022, proceeding to a correct cash
balance.
b. Prepare any entries necessary to make the books correct and complete.
*P7.14 (LO 6) (Bank Reconciliation and Adjusting Entries) The following
information is related to Haselhof Inc.
Balance per books at October 31, $41,847.85; November receipts $173,523.91;
November disbursements $164,893.54. Balance per bank statement November 30,
$56,274.20.
The following checks were outstanding at November 30.
1224 $1,635.29
1230 2,468.30

--- Page 603 ---
1232
2,125.15
1233
482.17
Included with the November bank statement and not recorded by the company were a
bank debit memo for $27.40 covering bank charges for the month, a debit memo for
$372.13 for a customer’s check returned and marked NSF, and a credit memo for
$1,400 representing bond interest collected by the bank in the name of Haselhof Inc.
Cash on hand at November 30 recorded and awaiting deposit amounted to $1,915.40.
Instructions
a. Prepare a bank reconciliation (to the correct balance) at November 30 for
Haselhof Inc. from the information above.
b. Prepare any journal entries required to adjust the cash account at November 30.
Concepts for Analysis
CA7.1 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Accounting) Simms Company has significant amounts of
trade accounts receivable. Simms uses the allowance method to estimate bad debts
instead of the direct write-off method. During the year, some specific accounts were
written off as uncollectible, and some that were previously written off as uncollectible
were collected.
Instructions
a. What are the deficiencies of the direct write-off method?
b. Describe the allowance method used to estimate bad debts and the theoretical
justification for its use.
c. How should Simms account for the collection of the specific accounts previously
written off as uncollectible?
CA7.2 (LO 3, 5) (Various Receivable Accounting Issues) Kimmel Company
uses the net method of accounting for sales discounts. Kimmel also offers trade
discounts to various groups of buyers.
On August 1, 2022, Kimmel sold some accounts receivable on a without guarantee
(recourse) basis. Kimmel incurred a finance charge.
Kimmel also has some notes receivable bearing an appropriate rate of interest. The
principal and total interest are due at maturity. The notes were received on October 1,
2022, and mature on September 30, 2024. Kimmel’s operating cycle is less than one
year.
Instructions
a.  

--- Page 604 ---
1. Using the net method, how should Kimmel account for the sales discounts at
the date of sale? What is the rationale for the amount recorded as sales
under the net method?
2. Using the net method, what is the effect on Kimmel’s sales revenues and net
income when customers do not take the sales discounts?
b. What is the effect of trade discounts on sales revenues and accounts receivable?
Why?
c. How should Kimmel report the accounts receivable factored on August 1, 2022?
Why?
d. How should Kimmel report the note receivable and the related interest on
December 31, 2022? Why?
CA7.3 (LO 3) 
 (Bad-Debt Reporting Issues) Clark Pierce conducts a
wholesale merchandising business that sells approximately 5,000 items per month
with a total monthly average sales value of €250,000. Its annual bad debt rate has
been approximately 1½% of gross receivables. In recent discussions with his
bookkeeper, Mr. Pierce has become confused by all the alternatives apparently
available in handling the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts balance. The following
information has been presented to Pierce.
1. An allowance can be set up (a) on the basis of a percentage of receivables or (b)
on the basis of a valuation of all past due or otherwise questionable accounts
receivable. Those considered uncollectible can be charged to such allowance at
the close of the accounting period, or specific items can be charged off directly
against (1) Gross Sales or to (2) Bad Debt Expense in the year in which they are
determined to be uncollectible.
2. Collection agency and legal fees, and so on, incurred in connection with the
attempted recovery of bad debts can be charged to (a) Bad Debt Expense, (b)
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts, (c) Legal Expense, or (d) General Expense.
3. Debts previously written off in whole or in part but currently recovered can be
credited to (a) Other Revenue, (b) Bad Debt Expense, or (c) Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts.
Instructions
Which of the above methods would you recommend to Mr. Pierce in regard to (1)
allowances and account write-offs, (2) collection expenses, and (3) recoveries? State
briefly and clearly the reasons supporting your recommendations.
CA7.4 (LO 2, 4) 
 (Basic Note and Accounts Receivable Transactions)
Part 1: On July 1, 2022, Wallace Company, a calendar-year company, sold special-
order merchandise on credit and received in return an interest-bearing note receivable
from the customer. Wallace Company will receive interest at the prevailing rate for a

--- Page 605 ---
note of this type. Both the principal and interest are due in one lump sum on June 30,
2023.
Instructions
When should Wallace Company report interest revenue from the note receivable?
Discuss the rationale for your answer.
Part 2: On December 31, 2022, Wallace Company had significant amounts of
accounts receivable as a result of credit sales to its customers. Wallace uses the
allowance method based on credit sales to estimate bad debts. Past experience
indicates that a reliable estimate of uncollectible accounts can be developed based on
an aging analysis of receivable balances. This pattern is expected to continue.
Instructions
a. Discuss the rationale for using the allowance method based on the balance in the
trade receivables accounts.
b. How should Wallace Company report the allowance for doubtful accounts on its
statement of financial position at December 31, 2022? Also, describe the
alternatives, if any, for presentation of bad debt expense in Wallace Company’s
2022 income statement.
CA7.5 (LO 3) (Bad-Debt Reporting Issues) Valasquez SA sells office equipment
and supplies to many organizations in the city and surrounding area on contract terms
of 2/10, n/30. In the past, over 75% of the credit customers have taken advantage of
the discount by paying within 10 days of the invoice date.
The number of customers taking the full 30 days to pay has increased within the last
year. Current indications are that less than 60% of the customers are now taking the
discount. Bad debts as a percentage of gross credit sales have risen from 1.5% in past
years to about 4% in the current year.
The controller has responded to a request for more information on the deterioration
in collections of accounts receivable with the report reproduced below.
Valasquez SA 
Finance Committee Report—Accounts Receivable Collections 
May 31, 2022
The fact that some credit accounts will prove uncollectible is normal. Annual bad
debt write-offs have been 1.5% of gross credit sales over the past five years. During
the last fiscal year, this percentage increased to 4%. The current Accounts Receivable
balance is R$1,600,000. The condition of this balance in terms of age and probability
of collection is as follows.
Proportion of Total
Age Categories
Probability of Collection
68% not yet due
99%
15% less than 30 days past due
96½%

--- Page 606 ---
8% 30 to 60 days past due
95%
5% 61 to 120 days past due
91%
2½% 121 to 180 days past due
70%
1½% over 180 days past due
20%
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts had a credit balance of R$43,300 on June 1, 2021.
Valasquez SA has provided for a monthly bad debt expense accrual during the current
fiscal year based on the assumption that 4% of gross credit sales will be uncollectible.
Total gross credit sales for the 2021–2022 fiscal year amounted to R$4,000,000.
Write-offs of bad accounts during the year totaled R$145,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare an accounts receivable aging schedule for Valasquez SA using the age
categories identified in the controller’s report to the finance committee showing:
1. The amount of accounts receivable outstanding for each age category and in
total.
2. The estimated amount that is uncollectible for each category and in total.
b. Compute the amount of the year-end adjustment necessary to bring Allowance
for Doubtful Accounts to the balance indicated by the aging analysis. Then,
prepare the necessary journal entry to adjust the accounting records.
c. In a recessionary environment with tight credit and high interest rates:
1. Identify steps Valasquez SA might consider to improve the accounts
receivable situation.
2. Then evaluate each step identified in terms of the risks and costs involved.
CA7.6 (LO 4) (Sale of Notes Receivable) Corrs Wholesalers Co. sells industrial
equipment for a standard 3-year note receivable. Revenue is recognized at time of
sale. Each note is secured by a lien on the equipment and has a face amount equal to
the equipment’s list price. Each note’s stated interest rate is below the customer’s
market rate at date of sale. All notes are to be collected in three equal annual
installments beginning one year after sale. Some of the notes are subsequently sold to
a bank with guarantee (recourse), some are subsequently sold without guarantee
(recourse), and some are retained by Corrs. At year-end, Corrs evaluates all
outstanding notes receivable and provides for estimated losses arising from defaults.
Instructions
a. What is the appropriate valuation basis for Corrs’s notes receivable at the date it
sells equipment?
b. How should Corrs account for the sale, without guarantee (recourse), of a
February 1, 2022, note receivable sold on May 1, 2022? Why is it appropriate to

--- Page 607 ---
account for it in this way?
c. At December 31, 2022, how should Corrs measure and account for the impact of
estimated losses resulting from notes receivable that it
1. Retained and did not sell?
2. Sold to bank with guarantee (recourse)?
CA7.7 (LO 4) (Zero-Interest-Bearing Note Receivable) On September 30, 2022,
Rolen Machinery Co. sold a machine and accepted the customer’s zero-interest-
bearing note. Rolen normally makes sales on a cash basis. Since the machine was
unique, its sales price was not determinable using Rolen’s normal pricing practices.
After receiving the first of two equal annual installments on September 30, 2023,
Rolen immediately sold the note with guarantee. On October 9, 2024, Rolen received
notice that the note was dishonored, and it paid all amounts due. At all times prior to
default, the note was reasonably expected to be paid in full.
Instructions
a.  
1. How should Rolen determine the sales price of the machine?
2. How should Rolen report the effects of the zero-interest-bearing note on its
income statement for the year ended December 31, 2022? Why is this
accounting presentation appropriate?
b. What are the effects of the sale of the note receivable with guarantee on Rolen’s
income statement for the year ended December 31, 2023, and its statement of
financial position at December 31, 2023?
c. How should Rolen account for the effects of the note being dishonored?
CA7.8 (LO 4) 
 (Reporting of Notes Receivable, Interest, and Sale
of Receivables) On July 1, 2022, Moresan Company sold special-order merchandise
on credit and received in return an interest-bearing note receivable from the
customer. Moresan will receive interest at the prevailing rate for a note of this type.
Both the principal and interest are due in one lump sum on June 30, 2023.
On September 1, 2022, Moresan sold special-order merchandise on credit and received
in return a zero-interest-bearing note receivable from the customer. The prevailing
rate of interest for a note of this type is determinable. The note receivable is due in
one lump sum on August 31, 2024.
Moresan also has significant amounts of accounts receivable as a result of credit sales
to its customers. On October 1, 2022, some accounts receivable were assigned to
Indigo Finance Company on a non-notification basis (Moresan handles collections)
for an advance of 75% of their amount at an interest charge of 8% on the balance
outstanding.

--- Page 608 ---
On November 1, 2022, other accounts receivable were sold on a without guarantee
(recourse) basis. The factor withheld 5% of the accounts receivable factored as
protection against sales returns and allowances and charged a finance charge of 3%.
Instructions
a. How should Moresan determine the interest revenue for 2022 on the:
1. Interest-bearing note receivable? Why?
2. Zero-interest-bearing note receivable? Why?
b. How should Moresan report the interest-bearing note receivable and the zero-
interest-bearing note receivable on its statement of financial position at
December 31, 2022?
c. How should Moresan account for subsequent collections on the accounts
receivable assigned on October 1, 2022, and the payments to Indigo Finance?
Why?
d. How should Moresan account for the accounts receivable factored on November
1, 2022? Why?
CA7.9 (LO 4) 
 (Accounting for Zero-Interest-Bearing Note) Soon after
beginning the year-end audit work on March 10 at Engone plc, the auditor has the
following conversation with the controller.
Controller: The year ended March 31st should be our most profitable in history and,
as a consequence, the board of directors has just awarded the officers
generous bonuses.
Auditor: I thought profits were down this year in the industry, according to your
latest interim report.
Controller: Well, they were down, but 10 days ago we closed a deal that will give us a
substantial increase for the year.
Auditor: Oh, what was it?
Controller: Well, you remember a few years ago our former president bought shares
in Henderson Enterprises because he had those grandiose ideas about
becoming a conglomerate. For 6 years, we have not been able to sell these
shares, which cost us £3,000,000 and have not paid anything in
dividends. Thursday, we sold these shares to Bimini Ltd. for £4,000,000.
So, we will have a gain of £700,000 (£1,000,000 pretax) which will
increase our net income for the year to £4,000,000, compared with last
year’s £3,800,000. As far as I know, we’ll be the only company in the
industry to register an increase in net income this year. That should help
the market price of the shares!
Auditor: Do you expect to receive the £4,000,000 in cash by March 31st, your
fiscal year-end?

--- Page 609 ---
Controller: No. Although Bimini Ltd. is an excellent company, it is a little tight for
cash because of its rapid growth. Consequently, we will receive a
£4,000,000 zero-interest-bearing note with payments of £400,000 per
year for the next 10 years. The first payment is due on March 31 of next
year.
Auditor: Why is the note zero-interest-bearing?
Controller: Because that’s what everybody agreed to. Since we don’t have any
interest-bearing debt, the funds invested in the note do not cost us
anything. Besides, we were not getting any dividends on the Henderson
Enterprises shares.
Instructions
Do you agree with the way the controller has accounted for the transaction? If not,
how should the transaction be accounted for?
CA7.10 (LO 3) 
 (Receivables Management) As the manager of the
accounts receivable department for Beavis Leather Goods, Ltd., you recently noticed
that Kelly Collins, your accounts receivable clerk, who is paid $1,200 per month, has
been wearing unusually tasteful and expensive clothing. (This is Beavis’s first year in
business.) This morning, Collins drove up to work in a brand new Lexus.
Naturally suspicious by nature, you decide to test the accuracy of the accounts
receivable balance of $132,000 as shown in the ledger. The following information is
available for your first year (precisely 9 months ended September 30, 2022) in
business.
1. Collections from customers
$188,000
2. Merchandise purchased
360,000
3. Ending merchandise inventory
90,000
4. Goods are marked to sell at 40% above cost.
Instructions
Assuming all sales were made on account, compute the ending accounts receivable
balance that should appear in the ledger, noting any apparent shortage. Then, draft a
memo dated October 3, 2022, to Mark Price, the branch manager, explaining the facts
in this situation. Remember that this problem is serious, and you do not want to make
hasty accusations.
CA7.11 (LO 3) 
 (Bad-Debt Reporting) Marvin Company is a subsidiary of
Hughes Corp. The controller believes that the yearly allowance for doubtful accounts
for Marvin should be 8% of gross accounts receivable. The president, nervous that the
parent company might expect the subsidiary to sustain its 10% growth rate, suggests
that the controller increase the allowance for doubtful accounts to 9% yearly. The
president thinks that the lower net income, which reflects a 6% growth rate, will be a
more sustainable rate for Marvin Company.

--- Page 610 ---
Instructions
a. Should the controller be concerned with Marvin Company’s growth rate in
estimating the allowance? Explain your answer.
b. Does the president’s request pose an ethical dilemma for the controller? Give
your reasons.
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s
complete annual report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available
online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the
following questions.
a. What criteria does M&S use to classify “Cash and cash equivalents” as reported in
its statement of financial position?
b. As of March 30, 2019, what balances did M&S have in cash and cash equivalents?
What were the major uses of cash during the year?
c. What amounts related to trade receivables does M&S report? Does M&S have any
past due but not impaired receivables?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in
Appendices B and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to
the financial statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. What were the cash and cash equivalents reported by adidas and Puma at the end
of 2018? What does each company classify as cash equivalents?
b. What were the accounts receivable (net) for adidas and Puma at the end of 2018?
Which company reports the greater allowance for doubtful accounts receivable
(amount and percentage of gross receivable) at the end of 2018?

--- Page 611 ---
c. Assuming that all “Net sales” (adidas) and all “Sales” (Puma) were net credit
sales, compute the accounts receivable turnovers for 2018 for adidas and Puma;
also compute the days outstanding for receivables. What is your evaluation of the
difference?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1: PetroChina Company Limited
PetroChina Company Limited (CHN) reported the following information in a
recent annual report.
PetroChina Company Limited
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(in RMB millions)
Assets at December 31
Current Year
Prior Year
Current assets
Cash at bank and on hand
49,953
64,299
Notes receivable
9,981
12,688
Accounts receivable
64,450
53,822
Advances to suppliers
32,813
39,296
Other receivables
14,165
8,576
Inventories
214,117
182,253
Other current assets
32,561
24,486
Total current assets
418,040
385,420
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Cash and Cash Equivalents. Cash and cash equivalents refer to all cash on hand
and deposits held at call with banks, short-term highly liquid investments that are
readily convertible to known amounts of cash and which are subject to an
insignificant risk of changes in value.
Notes Receivable. Notes receivable represents mainly bills of acceptance issued by
banks for the sale of goods and products. All notes receivable of the Group are due
within one year.
Instructions
a. What items other than coin and currency may be included in “cash”?
b. What items may be included in “cash equivalents”?
c. What are compensating balance arrangements, and how should they be reported
in financial statements?

--- Page 612 ---
d. Assume that PetroChina has an agreement to transfer receivables to various
banks. If the sale agreement meets the criteria for sale accounting, cash proceeds
were RMB345 million, the carrying value of the receivables sold was RMB360
million, and the fair value of the recourse obligation was RMB15 million, what
was the effect on income from the sale of receivables?
e. Briefly discuss the impact of the transaction in (d) on PetroChina’s liquidity.
Case 2: Meriter Group
Meriter Group is a sports manufacturer. To continue to be successful, Meriter must
generate new products, which requires significant amounts of cash. The following
current asset and current liability information is from a recent Meriter statement of
financial position. Following the Meriter data is the current asset and current liability
information for Monitor, another major sports manufacturer.
Meriter 
Statements of Financial Position (partial)
As of December 31
(in millions)
Current assets
Current Year Prior Year
Cash and equivalents
€ 244
€ 295
Short-term investments
141
86
Accounts receivable
1,624
1,459
Other
2,925
2,298
Total current assets
€4,934
€4,138
Total current liabilities
€3,645
€2,615
Monitor 
Statements of Financial Position (partial) 
As of December 31 
(in millions)
Current assets
Current Year Prior Year
Cash and equivalents
€  375.0
€  522.5
Receivables
396.5
389.6
Other current assets
590.6
483.3
Total current assets
€1,362.1
€1,395.4
Current liabilities
€  614.8
€  603.1
Part 1 (Cash and Cash Equivalents)
Instructions

--- Page 613 ---
a. What is the definition of a cash equivalent? Give some examples of cash
equivalents. How do cash equivalents differ from other types of short-term
investments?
b. Calculate (1) the current ratio and (2) working capital for each company for the
current year and discuss your results.
c. Is it possible to have too many liquid assets?
Part 2 (Accounts Receivable)
Meriter provided the following disclosure related to its accounts receivable.
(€ in millions)
Current Year Prior Year
Accounts receivable, gross
1,743
1,570
Less: allowance for doubtful accounts
119
111
Accounts receivable, net
1,624
1,459
Movement in allowances for doubtful accounts
Current Year Prior Year
Allowances at January 1
111
112
Additions
53
78
Write-offs and other
(45)
(79)
Allowances at December 31
119
111
Instructions
a. Compute Meriter’s accounts receivable turnover for the current year and discuss
your results. Meriter had net credit sales revenue of €10,799 million in the
current year.
b. Reconstruct the summary journal entries for the current year based on the
information in the disclosure.
c. Briefly discuss how the accounting for bad debts affects the analysis in Part 2 (a).
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
The Flatiron Pub provides catering services to local businesses. The following
information was available for Flatiron for the years ended December 31, 2021 and
2022.
31-Dec-21 31-Dec-22
Cash
€
 2,000
€
 1,685
Accounts receivable
46,000
?
Allowance for doubtful accounts
550
?

--- Page 614 ---
Other current assets
8,500
7,925
Current liabilities
37,000
44,600
Total net credit sales
205,000
255,000
Collections on accounts receivable
190,000
228,000
Flatiron management is preparing for a meeting with its bank concerning renewal of a
loan and has collected the following information related to the above balances.
1. The cash reported at December 31, 2022, reflects the following items: petty cash
€1,575 and postage stamps €110. The other current assets balance at 12/31/22
includes the checking account balance of €4,000.
2. On November 30, 2022, Flatiron agreed to accept a 6-month, €5,000 note bearing
12% interest, payable at maturity, from a major client in settlement of a €5,000
bill. The above balances do not reflect this transaction.
3. Flatiron factored some accounts receivable at the end of 2022. It transferred
accounts totaling €10,000 to Final Factor, Inc. without guarantee (recourse).
Final Factor will receive the collections from Flatiron’s customers and will retain
2% of the balances. Final Factor assesses Flatiron a finance charge of 3% on this
transfer. However, management has determined that the amount due from the
factor has not been recorded and is not included in the balances above.
4. Flatiron wrote off uncollectible accounts with balances of €1,600. On the basis of
the latest available information, the 2022 uncollectible accounts are estimated to
be 2.5% of accounts receivable.
Accounting
a. Based on the above transactions, determine the balance for (1) Accounts
Receivable and (2) Allowance for Doubtful Accounts at December 31, 2022.
b. Prepare the current assets section of Flatiron’s statement of financial position at
December 31, 2022.
Analysis
a. Compute Flatiron’s current ratio and accounts receivable turnover for December
31, 2022. Use these measures to analyze Flatiron’s liquidity. The accounts
receivable turnover in 2021 was 4.37.
b. Discuss how the above analysis of Flatiron’s liquidity would be affected if
Flatiron had transferred the receivables in a secured borrowing transaction.
Principles
What is the conceptual basis for recording bad debt expense based on the percentage-
of-receivables at December 31, 2022?

--- Page 615 ---
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 7, Statement of Cash Flows (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras. 6–7.
[2] International Accounting Standard 7, Statement of Cash Flows (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras. 6–7.
[3] FASB ASC 210-10-S99-1. [Predecessor literature: “Amendments to Regulations S-
X and Related Interpretations and Guidelines Regarding the Disclosure of
Compensating Balances and Short-Term Borrowing Arrangements,” Accounting Series
Release No. 148, Securities and Exchange Commission (November 13, 1973).]
[4] International Accounting Standard 7, Statement of Cash Flows (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 8.
[5] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, 2014), par. 47.
[6] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, 2014), par. 63.
[7] International Financial Reporting Standard 9, Financial Instruments (London,
U.K.: IFRS Foundation, November 2013), paras. 5.5.15–17.
[8] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003),
paras. 32–35.
[9] International Financial Reporting Standard 9, Financial Instruments (London,
U.K.: IFRS Foundation, 2010), par. 3.2.
[10] International Financial Reporting Standard 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosure
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2005),
paras. 1–19.
[11] International Financial Reporting Standard 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosure
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2005),
paras. 31–38.
Research Case
As the new staff person in your company’s treasury department, you have been asked
to conduct research related to a proposed transfer of receivables. Your supervisor
wants the authoritative sources for the following items that are discussed in the
securitization agreement.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free
IFRS access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the

--- Page 616 ---
search tool in your Internet browser to prepare responses to the following items.
(Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify relevant IFRSs that address derecognition of receivables.
b. What are the objectives for reporting transfers of receivables?
c. What transfers qualify for derecognition?
d. What are the provisions in IFRS related to continuing involvement?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7
Compare the accounting procedures for cash and receivables under IFRS and U.S.
GAAP.
The basic accounting and reporting issues related to recognition and measurement of
cash and receivables are similar in U.S. GAAP and IFRS. For example, the definition of
cash and cash equivalents as well as the use of allowance accounts, how to record
discounts, use of the allowance method to account for bad debts, and factoring are
similar for both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. In the wake of the international credit crisis, the
Boards worked together to improve the accounting for loan impairments and
securitizations.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP
related to cash and receivables.
Similarities
The accounting and reporting related to cash is essentially the same under both
IFRS and U.S. GAAP. In addition, the definition used for cash equivalents is
similar.
As with IFRS, cash and receivables are generally reported in the current assets
section of the statement of financial position (balance sheet) under U.S. GAAP.
As with IFRS, for trade and other accounts receivable without a significant
financing component, an allowance for uncollectible accounts should be recorded
to result in receivables reported at cash (net) realizable value. The estimation
approach used is similar to that under IFRS.
Similar to U.S. GAAP, IFRS requires that loans and receivables be accounted for
at amortized cost, adjusted for allowances for doubtful accounts.
Differences

--- Page 617 ---
Under IFRS, companies may report cash and receivables as the last items in
current assets. Under U.S. GAAP, these items are reported in order of liquidity.
While IFRS implies that receivables with different characteristics should be
reported separately, there is no standard that mandates this segregation. U.S.
GAAP has explicit guidance in the area.
IFRS differs from U.S. GAAP in its approach to estimating uncollectible accounts
on receivables with a significant financing component (e.g., notes receivable). For
long-term receivables that have not experienced a deterioration in credit quality
after origination, uncollectible accounts are estimated based on expected losses
over the next 12 months. For long-term receivables that experience a credit
quality decline, uncollectible accounts are estimated based on lifetime expected
losses (which is the model used under U.S. GAAP for all receivables).
Under IFRS, bank overdrafts are generally reported as cash. Under U.S. GAAP,
such balances are reported as liabilities.
IFRS and U.S. GAAP differ in the criteria used to account for transfers of
receivables. IFRS uses a combined approach focused on risks and rewards and
loss of control. U.S. GAAP uses loss of control as the primary criterion (see the
About the Numbers discussion below). In addition, IFRS generally permits partial
transfers; U.S. GAAP does not.
About the Numbers
The following illustration shows the rules of accounting for transfers of receivables
under U.S. GAAP.

--- Page 618 ---
As indicated, under U.S. GAAP, the accounting for transfers is a two-step process: (1)
determine if there is transfer of control, based on evaluation of three conditions, and
(2) if there is continuing involvement in a sale transaction, record the assets obtained
and liabilities incurred.
On the Horizon
The question of recording fair values for financial instruments will continue to be an
important issue to resolve as the Boards work together to narrow differences between
U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Both the IASB and the FASB have indicated that they believe
that financial statements would be more transparent and understandable if
companies recorded and reported all financial instruments at fair value. With the
recently issued guidance on impairments by both boards, IFRS and U.S. GAAP are
now more closely aligned with earlier recognition of impairments. Most believe that
both Boards’ approaches to estimating uncollectible accounts represent
improvements and address the weakness in previous bad debt accounting that was
highlighted by the 2007-2008 financial crisis. Time will tell if one model or the other
provides more useful information to investors and creditors.
GAAP Self-Test Questions

--- Page 619 ---
1. U.S. GAAP reports cash and cash equivalents:
a. similarly to IFRS.
b. as separate items.
c. similarly to IFRS, except for the reporting of bank overdrafts.
d. always as the first items in the current assets section.
2. Under U.S. GAAP, receivables are reported on the balance sheet at:
a. amortized cost.
b. amortized cost less allowance for doubtful accounts.
c. historical cost.
d. replacement cost.
3. Which of the following statements is false?
a. Receivables include equity securities purchased by the company.
b. Receivables include credit card receivables.
c. Receivables include amounts owed by employees as result of company loans to
employees.
d. Receivables include amounts resulting from transactions with customers.
4. Which of the following is the correct accounting under U.S. GAAP for cash?
a. Cash cannot be combined with cash equivalents.
b. Restricted cash funds are reported as liabilities.
c. Bank overdrafts are reported as liabilities.
d. Cash on hand is not reported on the balance sheet as Cash.
5. In recording a transfer of receivables:
a. IFRS focuses on loss of control.
b. U.S. GAAP focuses on loss of control and risks and rewards.
c. IFRS and U.S. GAAP allow partial derecognition.
d. IFRS allows partial derecognition.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP7.1 What are some steps taken by both the FASB and IASB to move to fair
value measurement for financial instruments?

--- Page 620 ---
GAAP7.2 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS with respect to the accounting for cash and receivables.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. b 3. a 4. c 5. d
Notes
1 Bank overdrafts usually occur because of a simple oversight by the company writing
the check. Banks often expect companies to have overdrafts from time to time and
therefore negotiate a fee as payment for this possible occurrence. However, at one
time, one large brokerage firm began intentionally overdrawing its accounts by
astronomical amounts—on some days exceeding $1 billion—thus obtaining
interest-free loans that it could invest. Because the amounts were so large and fees
were not negotiated in advance, the company came under criminal investigation for
its actions.
2 To the extent that discounts not taken reflect short-term financing, some argue that
companies could use an interest revenue account to record these amounts.
3 Cash discounts represent a form of variable consideration. Under the current
revenue recognition guidance, variable consideration should not be recognized
until the point in time when receipt of consideration is highly probable. See the
discussion on sales returns and allowances in the next section and in Chapter 18
for further information about variable consideration.
4 As indicated, at the date of sale, both the sales revenue and the return liability are
recorded based on estimated amounts. If the actual amounts later prove to be
higher or lower than the estimated amount, an adjustment will be made to the
Sales Revenue account. If returns are lower than expected, Sales Revenue will be
adjusted upward. If returns are greater than expected, Sales Revenue would be
adjusted down. IFRS requires that the estimate of returns be constrained so that
subsequent downward adjustments to Sales Revenue are highly unlikely. See
Chapter 18 for an extended discussion of variable consideration.
5 William J. Vatter, Managerial Accounting (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,
1950), p. 60.
6 The account description employed for the allowance account is usually Allowance
for Doubtful Accounts or Provision for Doubtful Accounts.
7 If using the direct write-off approach, the company debits the amount collected to
Cash and credits a revenue account entitled Uncollectible Amounts Recovered,
with proper notation in the customer’s account.
8 For trade receivables that do not have a significant financing component, lifetime
expected credit losses must be recognized in the measurement of the impairment.

--- Page 621 ---
If a trade receivable has a significant financing component, companies may employ
various estimation approaches (e.g., discounted cash flow techniques) to estimate
the impairment allowance. We discuss these approaches in more detail in Chapter
17, related to the discussion of investments.
9 In general, estimating bad debt expense with a focus on the income statement (e.g.,
percentage-of-sales) is not appropriate. That is, the goal is to arrive at an estimate
in the allowance, which reduces the receivables amount to cash realizable value
(i.e., the amount of receivables expected to be collected). While a percentage-of-
sales approach may provide a better “matching” of bad debt expense to sales, the
balance in the allowance likely will not provide a representationally faithful
estimate of cash realizable value.
10 Companies must measure expected uncollectible accounts and record bad debt
expense on all receivables, even those with a low risk of loss (e.g., receivables that
are not past due). Thus, in the Wilson example, an estimate for uncollectible
accounts is developed for balances that are under 30 days past due.
11 One regulatory agency brought action against a large financial institution, requiring
a reversal of $100 million of bad debt expense. This reversal increased after-tax
profit by $61 million. Recall from our earnings management discussion in Chapter
4 that increasing or decreasing income through management manipulation can
reduce the quality of financial reports.
12 The stated interest rate, also referred to as the face rate or the coupon rate, is the
rate contracted as part of the note. The effective interest rate, also referred to as
the market rate or the effective yield, is the rate used in the market to determine
the value of the note—that is, the discount rate used to determine present value.
13 Credit cards like MasterCard and Visa are a type of factoring arrangement.
Typically, the purchaser of the receivable charges a commission of ¾–1½ percent
the receivables purchased (the commission is 4–5 percent for credit card
factoring).
14 In general, IFRS does not allow netting of assets and liabilities unless there is an
explicit right of set-off. [8] Thus, Crest Textiles reports both a receivable and a
liability of €500,000 in its statement of financial position.
15 If a company transfers the receivables for custodial purposes, the custodial
arrangement is often referred to as a pledge.
16 What happens if Sino Bank collects the transferred accounts receivable rather than
Meng Mills? Sino Bank would simply remit the cash proceeds to Meng Mills, and
Meng Mills would make the same entries shown in Illustration 7.17. As a result,
Meng Mills reports these “collaterized” receivables as an asset on the statement of
financial position. The point here is that the risks and rewards of ownership have
not been transferred to Sino Bank.

--- Page 622 ---
17 In some situations, a company may continue to hold the receivable but does not
retain substantially all the risks and rewards of the receivable. In this case, the
company must determine whether it has retained control of the receivable. The
primary indicator that the company has control of an asset is if it can sell the asset.
If control has not been retained, the asset is derecognized and sale accounting is
applied. In all other cases, the company has retained control and the arrangement
is accounted for as a secured borrowing. As noted in Chapter 18, concepts of risks
and rewards and control are relevant in determining revenue recognition. However,
transfers of financial assets are outside the scope of the recently issued revenue
standard.
18 Concentrations of credit risk exist when receivables have common characteristics
that may affect their collection. These common characteristics might be companies
in the same industry or same geographic region. For example, Abu Dhabi
Aviation (ARE) recently reported nearly 61 percent of its trade receivables were
due from the United Arab Emirates (UAE) government and 16 percent from UAE’s
oil industry. Financial statement users want to know if a substantial amount of
receivables from such sales are to customers facing similar uncertain economic
conditions. No numerical guidelines are provided as to what is meant by a
“concentration of credit risk.” Information to be disclosed includes such items as
(1) the carrying amounts of the concentration, (2) information on the characteristic
that determines the concentration, (3) the amount of loss that could occur upon
non-performance, and (4) information on any collateral related to the receivable.
[11]
19 Several figures other than 365 could be used. A common alternative is 360 days
because it is divisible by 30 (days) and 12 (months). Use 365 days in any
homework computations.
20 As we mentioned in Chapter 7, paper checks continue to be used as a means of
payment. However, ready availability of desktop publishing software and hardware
has created new opportunities for check fraud in the form of duplicate, altered, and
forged checks. At the same time, new fraud-fighting technologies, such as
ultraviolet imaging, high-capacity barcodes, and biometrics, are being developed.
These technologies convert paper documents into electronically processed
document files, thereby reducing the risk of fraud.
Sources: J. Ciesielski, “Growing, Glowing Earnings: S&P 500’s 2011 Untaxed Income,” The Analyst’s
Accounting Observer (March 26, 2012); D. Zion, R. Gomatam, and R. Graziano, “Parking A-Lot Overseas: At
Least $600 Billion in Cash and over $2 Trillion in Earnings,” Credit Suisse Equity Research (March 17, 2015);
and B. Kochkodin, “Apple Leaves Overseas Cash Out of Its Latest Quarterly Report,” www.bloomberg.com (May
11, 2018).

--- Page 623 ---
