CHAPTER 1
Financial Reporting and Accounting Standards
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the global financial markets and their relation to
financial reporting.
2. Explain the objective of financial reporting.
3. Identify the major policy-setting bodies and their role in the
standard-setting process.
4. Discuss the challenges facing financial reporting.

--- Page 54 ---
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual
discussions that are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 1
As the following opening story indicates, countries are moving
quickly to adopt International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
It is estimated that over 300 of the 500 largest global companies are
using IFRS. However, the accounting profession faces many
challenges in establishing these standards, such as developing a
sound conceptual framework, use of fair value measurements,
proper consolidation of financial results, off-balance-sheet financing,
and proper accounting for leases and pensions. This chapter
discusses the international financial reporting environment and the
many factors affecting it, as follows.
Continuing Evolution of International Financial Reporting
The age of international trade and the interdependence of national
economies continue to evolve. Many of the largest companies in the
world often do more of their business in foreign lands than in their
home countries. Companies now access not only their home country
capital markets for financing, but others as well. With this globalization,
companies are recognizing the need to have one set of financial
reporting standards. For globalization of capital markets to be efficient,
what is reported for a transaction in Beijing should be reported the same
way in Paris, New York, or London.
In the past, many countries used their own sets of accounting standards
or followed standards set by larger countries, such as those used in

--- Page 55 ---
Europe or in the United States. That protocol has changed through the
adoption of a single set of rules, called International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS). As indicated in the following chart, there is broad
acceptance of IFRS around the world.
As indicated, 126 jurisdictions require the use of IFRS by all or most
public companies, with most of the remaining jurisdictions permitting
their use. Indeed, 27,000 of the 49,000 companies listed on the 88
largest securities exchanges in the world use IFRS. IFRS also has appeal
for non-public companies; since its publication, the IFRS for SMEs
(small and medium-sized entities) is required or permitted in 57
percent, or 85 of 150, profiled jurisdictions, while a further 11
jurisdictions are also considering adopting IFRS.
Changing to IFRS does not come without cost and effort. However,
academic research and studies by adopting jurisdictions provide
overwhelming evidence that the use of IFRS has brought the following
net benefits to capital markets:
IFRS was successful in creating a common accounting language for
capital markets (European Commission, 2015).

--- Page 56 ---
Evidence suggests that IFRS adoption was largely positive for listed
companies in Australia (Australian Accounting Standards Board,
2016).
IFRS adoption helped to reduce investment risk in domestic firms,
mitigate the “Korea discount,” and attract foreign capital via
overseas shares listing, bond issuance, or mergers and acquisitions
(Korean Accounting Standards Board, 2016).
Some companies also report benefits from being able to use IFRS in
their internal reporting. This improves their ability to compare operating
units in different jurisdictions by reducing the number of different
reporting systems. In Japan, where use of IFRS has been voluntary since
2010, business efficiency, enhanced comparability, and better
communications with international investors have been identified as the
main reasons why many Japanese companies made the choice to adopt
IFRS (Japanese Financial Services Agency). Thus, the international
financial reporting environment has and is continuing to evolve. With
these changes, it is hoped that a more effective system of reporting will
develop, which will benefit all.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for
a targeted summary review and practice problem with solution.
Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as
additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also
available online.
Global Markets
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the global financial markets and their relation to financial
reporting.
World markets are increasingly intertwined. International consumers
drive Japanese cars, wear Italian shoes and Scottish woolens, drink

--- Page 57 ---
Brazilian coffee and Indian tea, eat Swiss chocolate bars, sit on Danish
furniture, watch U.S. movies, and use Arabian oil. The tremendous
variety and volume of both exported and imported goods indicates the
extensive involvement in international trade—for many companies, the
world is their market.
To provide some indication of the extent of globalization of economic
activity, Illustration 1.1 provides a listing of the top 20 global
companies in terms of sales.

--- Page 58 ---
Rank
Company
Country
Revenues ($
millions)
1 Walmart
U.S.
5,00,343
2 State Grid
China
3,48,903
3 Sinopec Group
China
3,26,953
4 China National
Petroleum
China
3,26,008
5 Royal Dutch Shell
Netherlands
3,11,870
6 Toyota Motor
Japan
2,65,172
7 Volkswagen
Germany
2,60,028
8 BP
Britain
2,44,582
9 ExxonMobil
U.S.
2,44,363
10 Berkshire Hathaway
U.S.
2,42,137
11 Apple
U.S.
2,29,234
12 Samsung Electronics
South
Korea
2,11,940
13 McKesson
U.S.
2,08,357
14 Glencore
Switzerland
2,05,476
15 UnitedHealth Group
U.S.
2,01,159
16 Daimler
Germany
1,85,235
17 CVS Health
U.S.
1,84,765
18 Amazon.com
U.S.
1,77,866
19 EXOR Group
Italy
1,61,677
20 AT&T
U.S.
1,60,546
ILLUSTRATION 1.1 Top 20 Global Companies in Terms of
Sales
Source: Data from Global Fortune 500, 2018.
www.fortune.com/global500/2018/search/?revenues=desc.
In addition, due to technological advances and less onerous regulatory
requirements, investors are able to engage in financial transactions
across national borders and to make investment, capital allocation, and

--- Page 59 ---
financing decisions involving many foreign companies. Also, many
investors, in attempts to diversify their portfolio risk, have invested
more heavily in international markets. As a result, an increasing number
of investors are holding securities of foreign companies. For example,
over a recent seven-year period, estimated investments in foreign equity
securities by U.S. investors doubled, from $3,422 billion to $7,844
billion (OECD, 2018).
An indication of the significance of these international investment
opportunities can be found when examining the number of foreign
registrations on various securities exchanges. As shown in Illustration
1.2, a significant number of foreign companies are found on national
exchanges.
As indicated, capital markets are increasingly integrated and companies
have greater flexibility in deciding where to raise capital. In the absence
of market integration, there can be company-specific factors that make it
cheaper to raise capital and list/trade securities in one location versus
another. With the integration of capital markets, the automatic linkage
between the location of the company and the location of the capital
market is loosening. As a result, companies have expanded choices of
where to raise capital, either equity or debt. The move toward adoption
of global accounting standards has and will continue to facilitate this
trend.

--- Page 60 ---
Exchange
Market
Capitalization
($ millions)
Total
Listings
Domestic
Listings
Foreign
Listings
Foreign
%
NYSE
2,42,30,840
2,335
1,832
503
21.5
Nasdaq
1,16,58,201
3,080
2,637
443
14.4
Japan
Exchange
Group
56,14,217
3,677
3,672
5
0.1
Euronext
44,18,229
1,239
1,087
152
12.3
Hong Kong
Exchanges
and Clearing
41,89,279
2,382
2,218
164
6.9
LSE Group
39,34,491
2,450
2,049
401
16.4
TMX Group
22,86,818
3,408
3,354
54
1.6
National
Stock
Exchange of
India Limited
21,83,847
1,945
1,944
1
0.1
Deutsche
Boerse AG
19,49,134
519
469
50
9.6
SIX Swiss
Exchange
17,11,019
274
240
34
12.4
Nasdaq
Nordic and
Baltics
14,84,297
1,029
986
43
4.2
ASX
Australian
Securities
Exchange
14,54,171
2,124
1,983
141
6.6
Korea
Exchange
14,32,601
2,221
2,200
21
0.9
Taiwan Stock
Exchange
10,46,389
948
858
90
9.5

--- Page 61 ---
Exchange
Market
Capitalization
($ millions)
Total
Listings
Domestic
Listings
Foreign
Listings
Foreign
%
B3 (Brasil
Bolsa Balcão)
10,45,210
330
325
5
1.5
Johannesburg
Stock
Exchange
9,77,496
349
280
69
19.8
BME Spanish
Exchanges
7,74,947
2,937
2,910
27
0.9
Singapore
Exchange
7,25,887
738
478
260
35.2
ILLUSTRATION 1.2 International Exchange Statistics
Source: Data from Market Statistics-October 2019, The WFE Statistics Team.
The World Federation of Exchanges.
Financial Statements and Financial Reporting
Accounting is the universal language of business. One noted economist
and politician indicated that the single most important innovation
shaping capital markets was the development of sound accounting
principles. The essential characteristics of accounting are (1) the
identification, measurement, and communication of financial
information about (2) economic entities to (3) interested parties.
Financial accounting is the process that culminates in the
preparation of financial reports on the enterprise for use by both
internal and external parties. Users of these financial reports include
investors, creditors, managers, unions, and government agencies. In
contrast, managerial accounting is the process of identifying,
measuring, analyzing, and communicating financial information needed
by management to plan, control, and evaluate a company’s operations.
Financial statements are the principal means through which a company
communicates its financial information to those outside the business.
These statements provide a company’s history quantified in money
terms. The financial statements most frequently provided are (1) the
statement of financial position, (2) the income statement (or statement

--- Page 62 ---
of comprehensive income), (3) the statement of cash flows, and (4) the
statement of changes in equity. Note disclosures are an integral part of
each financial statement.
Some financial information is better provided, or can be provided only,
by means of financial reporting other than formal financial
statements. Examples include the president’s letter or supplementary
schedules in the company annual report, prospectuses, reports filed with
government agencies, news releases, management’s forecasts, and social
or environmental impact statements. Companies may need to provide
such information because of authoritative pronouncements and
regulatory rules, or custom. Or, they may supply it because management
wishes to disclose it voluntarily.
In this textbook, we focus on the development of two types of financial
information: (1) the basic financial statements and (2) related
disclosures.
Accounting and Capital Allocation
Resources are limited. As a result, people try to conserve them and
ensure that they are used effectively. Efficient use of resources often
determines whether a business thrives. This fact places a substantial
burden on the accounting profession.
Accountants must measure performance accurately and fairly on a
timely basis, so that the right managers and companies are able to
attract investment capital. For example, relevant financial information
that faithfully represents financial results allows investors and creditors
to compare the income and assets employed by such companies as
Nokia (FIN), McDonald’s (USA), Air China Ltd. (CHN), and Toyota
Motor Company (JPN). Because these users can assess the relative
return and risks associated with investment opportunities, they channel
resources more effectively. Illustration 1.3 shows how this process of
capital allocation works.

--- Page 63 ---
ILLUSTRATION 1.3 Capital Allocation Process
An effective process of capital allocation is critical to a healthy economy.
It promotes productivity, encourages innovation, and provides an
efficient and liquid market for buying and selling securities and
obtaining and granting credit. Unreliable and irrelevant information
leads to poor capital allocation, which adversely affects the securities
markets.
High-Quality Standards
To facilitate efficient capital allocation, investors need relevant
information and a faithful representation of that information to enable
them to make comparisons across borders. For example, assume that
you were interested in investing in the telecommunications industry.
Four of the largest telecommunications companies in the world are
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone (JPN), Deutsche Telekom
(DEU), Telefonica (ESP and PRT), and AT&T (USA). How do you
decide in which of these telecommunications companies to invest, if
any? How do you compare, for example, a Japanese company like
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone with a German company like Deutsche
Telekom?
A single, widely accepted set of high-quality accounting standards is a
necessity to ensure adequate comparability. Investors are able to make
better investment decisions if they receive financial information from
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone that is comparable to information
from Deutsche Telekom. Globalization demands a single set of high-
quality international accounting standards. But how is this to be
achieved? Here are some elements:

--- Page 64 ---
1. Single set of high-quality accounting standards established by a
single standard-setting body.
2. Consistency in application and interpretation.
3. Common disclosures.
4. Common high-quality auditing standards and practices.
5. Common approach to regulatory review and enforcement.
6. Education and training of market participants.
7. Common delivery systems (e.g., eXtensible Business Reporting
Language—XBRL).
8. Common approach to company governance and legal frameworks
around the world.1
Fortunately, as indicated in the opening story, significant changes in the
financial reporting environment are taking place, which hopefully will
lead to a single, widely accepted set of high-quality accounting
standards. The major standard-setters of the world, coupled with
regulatory authorities, now recognize that capital formation and investor
understanding are enhanced if a single set of high-quality accounting
standards is developed.
Objective of Financial Reporting
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Explain the objective of financial reporting.
What is the objective (or purpose) of financial reporting? The
objective of general-purpose financial reporting is to provide financial
information about the reporting entity that is useful to present
and potential equity investors, lenders, and other creditors in
making decisions about providing resources to the entity. Those
decisions involve buying, selling, or holding equity and debt
instruments, and providing or settling loans and other forms of credit.
[1] (See the Authoritative Literature References section near the end of

--- Page 65 ---
the chapter.) Information that is decision-useful to capital providers
(investors) may also be useful to other users of financial reporting who
are not investors. Let’s examine each of the elements of this objective.
General-Purpose Financial Statements
General-purpose financial statements provide financial reporting
information to a wide variety of users. For example, when Nestlé (CHE)
issues its financial statements, these statements help shareholders,
creditors, suppliers, employees, and regulators to better understand its
financial position and related performance. Nestlé’s users need this type
of information to make effective decisions. To be cost-effective in
providing this information, general-purpose financial statements are
most appropriate. In other words, general-purpose financial statements
provide, at the least cost, the most useful information possible.
Equity Investors and Creditors
The objective of financial reporting identifies investors and creditors as
the primary user group for general-purpose financial statements.
Identifying investors and creditors as the primary user group provides
an important focus of general-purpose financial reporting. For example,
when Nestlé issues its financial statements, its primary focus is on
investors and creditors because they have the most critical and
immediate need for information in financial reports. Investors and
creditors need this financial information to assess Nestlé’s ability to
generate net cash inflows and to understand management’s ability to
protect and enhance the assets of the company, which will be used to
generate future net cash inflows. As a result, the primary user groups
are not management, regulators, or some other non-investor group.

--- Page 66 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Don’t Forget Management Stewardship
In addition to providing decision-useful information about future
cash flows, management also is accountable to investors for the
custody and safekeeping of the company’s economic resources and
for their efficient and profitable use. For example, the management
of Nestlé has the responsibility of protecting its economic resources
from unfavorable effects of economic factors, such as price changes,
and technological and social changes. Because Nestlé’s performance
in discharging its responsibilities (referred to as its stewardship
responsibilities) usually affects its ability to generate net cash
inflows, financial reporting may also provide decision-useful
information to assess management performance in this role. [2]
Entity Perspective
As part of the objective of general-purpose financial reporting, an entity
perspective is adopted. Companies are viewed as separate and distinct
from their owners (present shareholders) using this perspective. The
assets of Nestlé are viewed as assets of the company and not of a specific
creditor or shareholder. Rather, these investors have claims on Nestlé’s
assets in the form of liability or equity claims. The entity perspective is
consistent with the present business environment, where most
companies engaged in financial reporting have substance distinct from
their investors (both shareholders and creditors). Thus, the perspective
that financial reporting should be focused only on the needs of
shareholders—often referred to as the proprietary perspective—is not
considered appropriate.
Decision-Usefulness
Investors are interested in financial reporting because it provides
information that is useful for making decisions (referred to as the
decision-usefulness approach). As indicated earlier, when making
these decisions, investors are interested in assessing (1) the company’s

--- Page 67 ---
ability to generate net cash inflows and (2) management’s ability to
protect and enhance the capital providers’ investments. Financial
reporting should therefore help investors assess the amounts, timing,
and uncertainty of prospective cash inflows from dividends or interest,
and the proceeds from the sale, redemption, or maturity of securities or
loans. In order for investors to make these assessments, the economic
resources of an enterprise, the claims to those resources, and the
changes in them must be understood. Financial statements and related
explanations should be a primary source for determining this
information.
The emphasis on “assessing cash flow prospects” does not mean that the
cash basis is preferred over the accrual basis of accounting. Information
based on accrual accounting generally indicates more accurately a
company’s present and continuing ability to generate favorable cash
flows than does information limited to the financial effects of cash
receipts and payments.
Recall from your first accounting course the objective of accrual-basis
accounting: it ensures that a company records events that change its
financial statements in the periods in which the events occur, rather
than only in the periods in which it receives or pays cash. Using the
accrual basis to determine net income means that a company recognizes
revenues when it provides the goods or performs the services (that is,
satisfies its performance obligation) rather than when it receives cash.
Similarly, it recognizes expenses when it incurs them rather than when
it pays them. Under accrual accounting, a company generally recognizes
revenues when it makes sales or performs services. The company can
then relate the revenues to the economic environment of the period in
which they occurred. Over the long run, trends in revenues and expenses
are generally more meaningful than trends in cash receipts and
disbursements.2
Standard-Setting Organizations

--- Page 68 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Identify the major policy-setting bodies and their role in the
standard-setting process.
For many years, many nations have relied on their own standard-setting
organizations. For example, Canada has the Accounting Standards
Board, Japan has the Accounting Standards Board of Japan, Germany
has the German Accounting Standards Committee, and the United
States has the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The
standards issued by these organizations are sometimes principles-based,
rules-based, tax-oriented, or business-based. In other words, they often
differ in concept and objective.
The main international standard-setting organization is based in
London, England, and is called the International Accounting
Standards Board (IASB). The IASB issues International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS), which are used on most foreign
exchanges. As indicated earlier, IFRS is presently used or permitted in
over 149 jurisdictions (similar to countries) and is rapidly gaining
acceptance in other jurisdictions as well.
IFRS has the best potential to provide a common platform on which
companies can report, resulting in financial statements investors can
use to compare financial information. As a result, our discussion focuses
on IFRS and the organization involved in developing these standards—
the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). The two
organizations that have a role in international standard-setting are the
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
and the IASB.
International Organization of Securities Commissions
(IOSCO)
The International Organization of Securities Commissions
(IOSCO) is an association of organizations that regulate the world’s
securities and futures markets. Members are generally the main
financial regulator for a given country. IOSCO does not set accounting
standards. Instead, this organization is dedicated to ensuring that the

--- Page 69 ---
global markets can operate in an efficient and effective basis. The
member agencies (such as from France, Germany, New Zealand, and the
United States) have resolved to:
Cooperate to promote high standards of regulation in order to
maintain just, efficient, and sound markets.
Exchange information on their respective experiences in order to
promote the development of domestic markets.
Unite their efforts to establish standards and an effective
surveillance of international securities transactions.
Provide mutual assistance to promote the integrity of the markets
by a rigorous application of the standards and by effective
enforcement against offenses.
IOSCO supports the development and use of IFRS as the single set of
high-quality international standards in cross-border offerings and
listings. It recommends that its members allow multinational issuers to
use IFRS in cross-border offerings and listings, as supplemented by
reconciliation, disclosure, and interpretation where necessary to address
outstanding substantive issues at a national or regional level. (For more
information, go to the IOSCO website.)

--- Page 70 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
What About the Little Guy?
As discussed in the opening story, IFRS has gained acceptance,
especially for publicly traded companies that wish to access
international capital markets. What about non-public companies?
Well, IFRS has a financial reporting answer for these “SMEs” (small
and medium-sized entities).
The 250-page IFRS for SMEs focuses on the information needs of
lenders, creditors, and other users of SME financial statements, who
are primarily interested in information about cash flows, liquidity,
and solvency. It also takes into account the costs to SMEs and the
capabilities of SMEs to prepare financial information. While based
on the full-IFRS principles, the IFRS for SMEs is considerably less
complex. It reflects five types of simplifications from full IFRS:
1. Some full-IFRS topics are omitted because they are not relevant
to typical SMEs.
2. Some full-IFRS accounting policy options are not allowed
because a more simplified method is available to SMEs.
3. Many of the full-IFRS recognition and measurement principles
have been simplified.
4. Substantially fewer disclosures are required.
5. The full-IFRS text has been redrafted in “plain English” for
increased understandability and translation.
To date, 85 of the 150 jurisdictions whose profiles are followed by
the IASB require or permit the IFRS for SMEs. It is also currently
under consideration in a further 11 jurisdictions. So IFRS is gaining
traction with both public and non-public companies.
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)

--- Page 71 ---
The standard-setting structure internationally is composed of the
following four organizations:
1. The IFRS Foundation provides oversight to the IASB, IFRS
Advisory Council, and IFRS Interpretations Committee. In this role,
it appoints members, reviews effectiveness, and helps in the
fundraising efforts for these organizations.
2. The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
develops, in the public interest, a single set of high-quality,
enforceable, and global international financial reporting standards
for general-purpose financial statements.3
3. The IFRS Advisory Council (the Advisory Council) provides
advice and counsel to the IASB on major policies and technical
issues.
4. The IFRS Interpretations Committee assists the IASB through
the timely identification, discussion, and resolution of financial
reporting issues within the framework of IFRS.
In addition, as part of the governance structure, a Monitoring Board
was created. The purpose of this board is to establish a link between
accounting standard-setters and those public authorities (e.g., IOSCO)
that generally oversee them. The Monitoring Board also provides
political legitimacy to the overall organization. Illustration 1.4 shows
the organizational structure for the setting of international accounting
standards.

--- Page 72 ---
ILLUSTRATION 
1.4 
International 
Standard-Setting
Structure
Due Process
In establishing financial accounting standards, the IASB has a thorough,
open, and transparent due process. The IASB due process has the
following elements: (1) an independent standard-setting board overseen
by a geographically and professionally diverse body of trustees; (2) a
thorough and systematic process for developing standards; (3)
engagement with investors, regulators, business leaders, and the global
accountancy profession at every stage of the process; and (4)
collaborative efforts with the worldwide standard-setting community.
To implement its due process, the IASB follows specific steps to develop
a typical IFRS, as Illustration 1.5 shows.

--- Page 73 ---
ILLUSTRATION 1.5 IASB Due Process
Furthermore, the characteristics of the IASB, as shown below, reinforce
the importance of an open, transparent, and independent due process.
Membership. The Board consists of 14 full-time members.
Members are well-paid, appointed for five-year renewable terms,
and come from different countries.4
Autonomy. The IASB is not part of any other professional
organization. It is appointed by and answerable only to the IFRS
Foundation.
Independence. Full-time IASB members must sever all ties from
their past employer. The members are selected for their expertise in
standard-setting rather than to represent a given country.
Voting. A majority of votes are needed to issue a new IFRS. In the
event of a tie, the chairperson is granted an additional vote.
With these characteristics, the IASB and its members will be insulated
as much as possible from the political process, favored industries, and
national or cultural bias.

--- Page 74 ---
Types of Pronouncements
The IASB issues three major types of pronouncements:
1. International Financial Reporting Standards.
2. Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting.
3. International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations.
International Financial Reporting Standards
Financial accounting standards issued by the IASB are referred to as
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The IASB has
issued 17 of these standards to date, covering such subjects as business
combinations, share-based payments, and leases.
Prior to the IASB (formed in 2001), standard-setting on the
international level was done by the International Accounting Standards
Committee, which issued International Accounting Standards (IAS). The
committee issued 41 IASs, many of which have been amended or
superseded by the IASB. Those still remaining are considered under the
umbrella of IFRS.
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting

--- Page 75 ---
As part of a long-range effort to move away from the problem-by-
problem approach, the IASB uses an IFRS conceptual framework. This
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting sets forth the
fundamental objective and concepts that the Board uses in developing
future standards of financial reporting. The intent of the document is to
form a cohesive set of interrelated concepts—a conceptual framework—
that will serve as tools for solving existing and emerging problems in a
consistent manner. For example, the objective of general-purpose
financial reporting discussed earlier is part of this Conceptual
Framework. The Conceptual Framework and any changes to it pass
through the same due process (preliminary views, public hearing,
exposure draft, etc.) as an IFRS. However, this Conceptual Framework is
not an IFRS and hence does not define standards for any particular
measurement or disclosure issue. Nothing in this Conceptual
Framework overrides any specific international accounting standard.
The Conceptual Framework is discussed more fully in Chapter 2.
International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations

--- Page 76 ---
Interpretations issued by the IFRS Interpretations Committee are
also considered authoritative and must be followed. These
interpretations cover (1) newly identified financial reporting issues not
specifically dealt with in IFRS and (2) issues where unsatisfactory or
conflicting interpretations have developed, or seem likely to develop, in
the absence of authoritative guidance. The IFRS Interpretations
Committee has issued over 20 of these interpretations to date.
In keeping with the IASB’s own approach to setting standards, the IFRS
Interpretations Committee applies a principles-based approach in
providing interpretative guidance. To this end, the IFRS Interpretations
Committee looks first to the Conceptual Framework as the foundation
for formulating a consensus. It then looks to the principles articulated in
the applicable standard, if any, to develop its interpretative guidance and
to determine that the proposed guidance does not conflict with
provisions in IFRS.
The IFRS Interpretations Committee helps the IASB in many ways. For
example, emerging issues often attract public attention. If not resolved
quickly, these issues can lead to financial crises and scandals. They can
also undercut public confidence in current reporting practices. The next
step, possible governmental intervention, would threaten the
continuance of standard-setting in the private sector. The IFRS
Interpretations Committee can address controversial accounting
problems as they arise. It determines whether it can resolve them or
whether to involve the IASB in solving them. In essence, it becomes a
“problem filter” for the IASB. Thus, the IASB will hopefully work on

--- Page 77 ---
more pervasive long-term problems, while the IFRS Interpretations
Committee deals with short-term emerging issues.
Hierarchy of IFRS
Because it is a private organization, the IASB has no regulatory mandate
and therefore no enforcement mechanism. As a result, the Board relies
on other regulators to enforce the use of its standards. For example, the
European Union requires publicly traded member country companies to
use IFRS.
Any company indicating that it is preparing its financial statements in
conformity with IFRS must use all of the standards and interpretations.
The following hierarchy is used to determine what recognition,
valuation, and disclosure requirements should be used. Companies first
look to:
1. International Financial Reporting Standards, International
Accounting Standards (issued by the predecessor to the IASB), and
IFRS interpretations originated by the IFRS Interpretations
Committee (and its predecessor, the IAS Interpretations
Committee);
2. The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting; and
3. Pronouncements of other standard-setting bodies that use a similar
conceptual framework (e.g., U.S. GAAP).
In the absence of a standard or an interpretation in item 1 above,
companies look to the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting
and then to most recent pronouncements of other standard-setting
bodies that use a similar conceptual framework to develop accounting
standards (or other accounting literature and accepted industry practices
to the extent they do not conflict with the above). The overriding
requirement of IFRS is that the financial statements provide a fair
presentation (often referred to as a “true and fair view”). Fair
representation is assumed to occur if a company follows the guidelines
established in IFRS.5 [3]
Financial Reporting Challenges

--- Page 78 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Discuss the challenges facing financial reporting.
Much is right about international financial reporting. One reason for
this success is that financial statements and related disclosures capture
and organize financial information in a useful and reliable fashion.
However, much still needs to be done. Here are some of the major
challenges.
IFRS in a Political Environment
User groups are possibly the most powerful force influencing the
development of IFRS. User groups consist of those most interested in or
affected by accounting rules. Various participants in the financial
reporting environment may want particular economic events accounted
for or reported in a particular way, and they fight hard to get what they
want. They know that the most effective way to influence IFRS is to
participate in the formulation of these rules or to try to influence or
persuade the formulators of them.6
These user groups often target the IASB, to pressure it to change the
existing rules and develop new ones. In fact, these pressures have been
multiplying. Some influential groups demand that the accounting
profession act more quickly and decisively to solve its problems. Other
groups resist such action, preferring to implement change more slowly,
if at all. Illustration 1.6 shows the various user groups that apply
pressure.
Should there be politics in establishing IFRS for financial accounting
and reporting? Why not? Politics is everywhere: at the office, home,
school, church, temple, and mosque. IFRS is part of the real world, and
it cannot escape political pressures.
That is not to say that politics in establishing IFRS is a negative force.
Considering the economic consequences of many accounting rules,
special interest groups are expected to vocalize their reactions to
proposed rules.7 What the Board should not do is issue standards that
are primarily politically motivated. While paying attention to its

--- Page 79 ---
constituencies, the Board should base IFRS on sound research and a
conceptual framework that has its foundation in economic reality.
ILLUSTRATION 
1.6 
User 
Groups 
that 
Influence 
the
Formulation of Accounting Standards

--- Page 80 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Fair Consequences?
No accounting issue better illustrates the economic consequences of
accounting than the current debate over the use of fair value
accounting for financial assets. The IASB has had long-standing
standards requiring the use of fair value accounting for financial
assets, such as investments and other financial instruments. Fair
value provides the most relevant and reliable information for
investors about these assets and liabilities. However, in the wake of
the credit crisis of 2008, some countries, their central banks, and
bank regulators wanted to suspend fair value accounting based on
concerns that use of fair value accounting, which calls for recording
significant losses on poorly performing loans and investments,
would scare investors and depositors and lead to a “run on the bank.”
Most notable was the lobbying of then French President Nicolas
Sarkozy in urging his European Union counterparts to back changes
to accounting rules and give banks and insurers some breathing
space amid the market turmoil. Mr. Sarkozy sought agreement to the
new regulations, including changes to the mark-to-market
accounting rules that have been blamed for aggravating the crisis.
International regulators also have conducted studies of fair value
accounting and its role in the credit crisis. It is clear that political
pressure affected the final standard on financial instruments. The
standard (issued in 2016) permits companies to use amortized cost
instead of fair value for held-for-collection financial assets. The
amortized cost approach was favored by financial institutions with
substantial portfolios of held-for-collection financial assets. These
financial institutions applied much pressure on regulators, noting
the dire economic consequences that might follow if they had to use
fair value in reporting on these financial assets. In short, numbers
have consequences.
Sources: Adapted from Ben Hall and Nikki Tait, “Sarkozy Seeks EU Accounting
Change,” The Financial Times Limited (September 30, 2008).

--- Page 81 ---
The Expectations Gap
Accounting scandals at companies like Parmalat (ITA), Siemens
(DEU), and Carillion (GBR) have attracted the attention of regulators,
investors, and the general public. Due to the size and the number of
fraudulent reporting cases, some question whether the accounting
profession is doing enough. The expectations gap—what the public
thinks accountants should do and what accountants think they can do—
is difficult to close.
Although the profession can argue rightfully that accounting cannot be
responsible for every financial catastrophe, it must continue to strive to
meet the needs of society. However, efforts to meet these needs will
become more costly to society. The development of highly transparent,
clear, and reliable systems to meet public expectations requires
considerable resources.
Significant Financial Reporting Issues
While our reporting model has worked well in capturing and organizing
financial information in a useful and reliable fashion, much still needs
to be done. For example, if we move ahead to the year 2030 and look
back at financial reporting today, we might read the following.
Non-financial measurements. Financial reports failed to
provide some key performance measures widely used by
management, such as customer satisfaction indexes, backlog
information, and reject rates on goods purchased.
Forward-looking information. Financial reports failed to
provide forward-looking information needed by present and
potential investors and creditors. One individual noted that
financial statements in 2022 should have started with the phrase,
“Once upon a time,” to signify their use of historical cost and
accumulation of past events.
Soft assets. Financial reports focused on hard assets (inventory,
plant assets) but failed to provide much information about a
company’s soft assets (intangibles). The most valuable assets are
often intangible. Consider Sony’s (JPN) expertise in electronics and
Ikea’s (NLD) brand image.

--- Page 82 ---
Timeliness. Companies only prepared financial statements
quarterly and provided audited financials annually. Little to no real-
time financial statement information was available.
We believe each of these challenges must be met for the accounting
profession to provide the type of information needed for an efficient
capital allocation process. We are confident that changes will occur,
based on these positive signs:
Already, some companies voluntarily disclose information deemed
relevant to investors. Often such information is non-financial. For
example, banking companies now disclose data on loan growth,
credit quality, operating efficiency, capital management, and
management strategy.
Initially, companies used the Internet to provide limited financial
data. Now, most companies publish their annual reports in several
formats on the Web. The most innovative companies offer sections
of their annual reports in a format that the user can readily
manipulate, such as in an electronic spreadsheet format. Companies
also format their financial reports using eXtensible Business
Reporting Language (XBRL), which permits quicker and lower-cost
access to companies’ financial information.
More accounting standards now require the recording or disclosing
of fair value information. For example, companies either record
investments in shares and bonds, debt obligations, and derivatives
at fair value, or companies show information related to fair values
in the notes to the financial statements.
Changes in these directions will enhance the relevance of financial
reporting and provide useful information to financial statement readers.
Ethics in the Environment of Financial Accounting
A noted commentator on the subject of accounting ethics observed,
“Based on my experience, new graduates tend to be idealistic … thank
goodness for that! Still it is very dangerous to think that your armor is
all in place and say to yourself, ‘I would have never given in to that.’ The
pressures don’t explode on us; they build, and we often don’t recognize

--- Page 83 ---
them until they have us.” These observations are particularly
appropriate for anyone entering the business world.
In accounting, as in other areas of business, we frequently encounter
ethical dilemmas. Some of these dilemmas are simple and easy to
resolve. However, many are not, requiring difficult choices among
allowable alternatives. Companies that concentrate on “maximizing the
bottom line,” “facing the challenges of competition,” and “stressing
short-term results” place accountants in an environment of conflict and
pressure. Basic questions such as, “Is this way of communicating
financial information good or bad?” “Is it right or wrong?” and “What
should I do in the circumstance?” cannot always be answered by simply
adhering to IFRS or following the rules of the profession. Technical
competence is not enough when encountering ethical decisions.
Doing the right thing is not always easy or obvious. The pressures “to
bend the rules,” “to play the game,” or “to just ignore it” can be
considerable. For example, “Will my decision affect my job performance
negatively?” “Will my superiors be upset?” or “Will my colleagues be
unhappy with me?” are often questions businesspeople face in making a
tough ethical decision. The decision is more difficult because there is no
comprehensive ethical system to provide guidelines. Time, job, client,
personal, and peer pressures can complicate the process of ethical
sensitivity and selection among alternatives. Throughout this textbook,
we present ethical considerations to help sensitize you to the
type of situations you may encounter in the performance of your
professional responsibility.
International Convergence
As discussed in the opening story, convergence to a single set of high-
quality financial reporting standards is desirable. Here are some
examples of how convergence is occurring:
1. China is reforming its financial reporting system through an
approach called a continuous convergence process. The goal is to
eliminate differences between its standards and IFRS.
2. Japan now permits the use of IFRS for domestic companies. The
number of companies electing to use IFRS is expected to increase

--- Page 84 ---
substantially in the near future.
3. The IASB and the FASB (of the United States) have spent the last 19
years working to converge their standards. The two Boards issued
standards on revenue recognition, financial instruments, and lease
accounting, which mark the end of the Boards’ formal convergence
project. Although the IASB and FASB standards in these three areas
are similar, there are significant differences as well.8
4. Recently, Malaysia was instrumental in helping to amend the
accounting for agricultural assets.
5. Italy’s standard-setting group has provided advice and counsel on
the accounting for business combinations under common control.
In addition, U.S. and European regulators have agreed to recognize each
other’s standards for listing on the various world securities exchanges.
As a result, costly reconciliation requirements have been eliminated,
which should lead to greater comparability and transparency. Because
international accounting issues are so important, we provide in each
chapter of this textbook Global Accounting Insights, which
highlight non-IFRS standards, mostly those from the United States. This
feature will help you to understand the changes that are taking place in
the financial reporting area as we move toward converged global
accounting standards.

--- Page 85 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Can You Do That?
One of the more difficult issues related to convergence and
international accounting standards is that countries have different
cultures and customs. For example, the former chair of the IASB
explained it this way regarding Europe:
“In the U.K. everything is permitted unless it is prohibited. In
Germany, it is the other way around; everything is prohibited
unless it is permitted. In the Netherlands, everything is prohibited
even if it is permitted. And in France, everything is permitted even
if it is prohibited. Add in countries like Japan, the United States,
and China, it becomes very difficult to meet the needs of each of
these countries.”
With this diversity of thinking around the world, it understandable
why accounting convergence has been so elusive.
Source: Sir D. Tweedie, “Remarks at the Robert P. Maxon Lectureship,” George
Washington University (April 7, 2010).
Conclusion
International financial reporting continues to evolve. A number of
convergence projects already are completed and differences eliminated.
However, as one international regulator indicates, “the ultimate
question remains whether IFRS will in fact function as the single set of
high-quality, global accounting standards that the world has been
seeking for so long. At least, when it comes to satisfying investors’
concerns, there is no question of the attractiveness of the promise of a
truly global accounting standard. The only real question is not whether
this is good for investors, but how quickly both the accounting standards
and the process by which they are established and developed can be
globally recognized as world-class.”
Review and Practice

--- Page 86 ---
Key Terms Review
accrual-basis accounting
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting
decision-usefulness
due process
economic consequences
entity perspective
expectations gap
financial accounting
financial reporting
financial statements
general-purpose financial statements
hierarchy (of IFRS)
IFRS Advisory Council
IFRS Foundation
IFRS Interpretations Committee
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB)
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
interpretations
managerial accounting
Monitoring Board
objective of financial reporting
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the global financial markets and their relation to
financial reporting.

--- Page 87 ---
World markets are increasingly intertwined. With the integration of
capital markets, the automatic linkage between the location of the
company and the location of the capital market is loosening. As a result,
companies have expanded choices of where to raise capital, either equity
or debt. The move toward adoption of global accounting standards has
facilitated and will continue to facilitate this trend.
Financial statements and other means of financial reporting.
Companies most frequently provide (1) the statement of financial
position, (2) the income statement or statement of comprehensive
income, (3) the statement of cash flows, and (4) the statement of
changes in equity. Financial reporting other than financial statements
may take various forms. Examples include the president’s letter and
supplementary schedules in the company annual report, prospectuses,
reports filed with government agencies, news releases, management’s
forecasts, and descriptions of a company’s social or environmental
impact.
Efficient use of scarce resources. Accounting provides reliable,
relevant, and timely information to managers, investors, and creditors to
allow resource allocation to the most efficient enterprises. Accounting
also provides measurements of efficiency (profitability) and financial
soundness.
High-quality standards. A single, widely accepted set of high-quality
accounting standards is a necessity to ensure adequate comparability.
Investors are increasingly making investing decisions across
international jurisdictions. As a result, investors need financial
information that is comparable across national boundaries. But what are
high-quality accounting standards, how should they be developed, and
how should they be enforced is still a much debated issue.
2 Explain the objective of financial reporting.
The objective of general-purpose financial reporting is to provide
financial information about the reporting entity that is useful to present
and potential equity investors, lenders, and other creditors in making
decisions about providing resources to the entity. Information that is

--- Page 88 ---
decision-useful to investors may also be useful to other users of
financial reporting who are not investors.
3 Identify the major policy-setting bodies and their role in
the standard-setting process.
The International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)
does not set accounting standards but is dedicated to ensuring that the
global markets can operate in an efficient and effective manner. The
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) is the leading
international accounting standard-setting organization. Its mission is to
develop, in the public interest, a single set of high-quality and
understandable International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) for
general-purpose financial statements. Standards issued by the IASB
have been adopted by over 149 jurisdictions (similar to countries)
worldwide, and all publicly traded European companies must use IFRS.
IFRS is comprised of (a) International Financial Reporting Standards,
(b) International Accounting Standards, and (c) interpretations issued
by the IFRS Interpretations Committee or the former Standing
Interpretations Committee (SIC). In the absence of a standard or an
interpretation, other accounting literature, including that contained in
the Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting and recent
pronouncements of other standard-setting bodies that use a similar
conceptual framework, can be applied.
4 Discuss the challenges facing financial reporting.
Challenges include (1) the development of IFRS in a political
environment; (2) the expectations gap; (3) financial reporting issues
related to key performance measures widely used by management,
forward-looking information needed by investors and creditors,
sufficient information on a company’s soft assets (intangibles), and real-
time financial information, including fair values; (4) ethics in
accounting; and (5) international convergence.

--- Page 89 ---
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review
exercises with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
At the completion of Bloom NV’s audit, the president, Judy Bloom,
asks about the meaning of the phrase “in conformity with IFRS” that
appears in your audit report on the management’s financial
statements. Judy observes that the meaning of the phrase must
include something more and different than what she thinks of as
“standards.” Judy is curious about the pronouncements that are
encompassed in IFRS and wonders, if there are different types of
pronouncements, which are more authoritative than others?
Instructions
a. Describe the pronouncements that comprise IFRS.
b. Explain to Judy how a company determines which type of
pronouncement takes precedence when deciding the recognition,
valuation, and disclosure related to a particular transaction.
Solution
a. The IASB issues three major types of pronouncements:
1. International Financial Reporting Standards.
2. Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting.
3. International Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations.
IASB standards are financial accounting standards issued by the
IASB and are referred to as International Financial Reporting
Standards (IFRS). The Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting sets forth the fundamental objective and concepts that
the Board uses in developing accounting standards that will serve

--- Page 90 ---
as tools for solving existing and emerging problems in a consistent
manner.
b. The hierarchy of IFRS to determine what recognition, valuation,
and disclosure requirements should be used is:
1. International Financial Reporting Standards, including
International Accounting Standards, and interpretations from
the International Financial Reporting Standards
Interpretations Committee.
2. If not addressed in 1., refer to IFRS Concepts Statements.
3. If not addressed in 1. and 2., refer to pronouncements of other
standard-setting bodies that use a similar conceptual
framework (e.g. U.S. GAAP).
Any company indicating that it is preparing its financial statements
in conformity with IFRS must comply with the standards and
interpretations.
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources
are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. What is happening to world markets, and what are the implications
for financial reporting?
2. Differentiate broadly between financial accounting and managerial
accounting.
3. What are the major financial statements, and what is the difference
between financial statements and financial reporting?
4. How does accounting help in the capital allocation process?
5. What is the benefit of a single set of high-quality accounting
standards?
6. What is the objective of financial reporting?
7. What is meant by general-purpose financial statements?

--- Page 91 ---
8. Who is the primary user group for general-purpose financial
statements?
9. Comment on the following statement: A perspective that financial
reporting should be focused only on the needs of the shareholders—
often referred to as the proprietary perspective—is considered
appropriate.
10. Comment on the following statement: The objective of financial
reporting is primarily to provide decision-useful information for
assessing the performance of management.
11. What are the two key organizations in the development of
international accounting standards? Explain their role.
12. What is IOSCO?
13. What is the mission of the IASB?
14. What is the purpose of the Monitoring Board?
15. How are IASB preliminary views and IASB exposure drafts related to
IASB standards?
16. Distinguish between IASB standards and the Conceptual Framework
for Financial Reporting.
17. Rank from most authoritative to least authoritative the following
three items: Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting,
International Financial Reporting Standards, and International
Financial Reporting Standards Interpretations.
18. Explain the role of the IFRS Interpretations Committee.
19. What are some of the major challenges facing the accounting
profession?
20. What are the sources of pressure that change and influence the
development of IFRS?
21. Some individuals have indicated that the IASB must be cognizant of
the economic consequences of its pronouncements. What is meant by
“economic consequences”? What dangers exist if politics play too much
of a role in the development of IFRS?

--- Page 92 ---
22. If you were given complete authority in the matter, how would you
propose that IFRS should be developed and enforced?
23. One writer recently noted that a high percentage of all companies
prepare statements that are in accordance with IFRS. Why then is there
such concern about fraudulent financial reporting?
24. What is the “expectations gap”? What is the profession doing to try
to close this gap?
25. How are financial accountants challenged in their work to make
ethical decisions? Is technical mastery of IFRS not sufficient to the
practice of financial accounting?
Concepts for Analysis
CA1.1 (LO 3) (IFRS and Standard-Setting) Presented below are five
statements to identify as true or false. If false, explain why the
statement is incorrect.
1. IFRS is the term used to indicate the whole body of IASB
authoritative literature.
2. Any company claiming compliance with IFRS must follow most
standards and interpretations but not the disclosure requirements.
3. The primary governmental body that has influence over the IASB is
the IFRS Advisory Council.
4. The overriding requirement of IFRS is for the financial statements
to give a fair presentation (or true and fair view).
5. The IASB has a government mandate and therefore does not have to
follow due process in issuing an IFRS.
CA1.2 (LO 2, 3) (IFRS and Standard-Setting) Presented below are
four statements to identify as true or false. If false, explain why the
statement is incorrect.
1. The objective of financial statements emphasizes a stewardship
approach for reporting financial information.

--- Page 93 ---
2. The objective of financial reporting is to prepare a statement of
financial position, a statement of comprehensive income, a
statement of cash flows, and a statement of changes in equity.
3. The difference between International Accounting Standards and
IFRS is that International Accounting Standards are more
authoritative.
4. The objective of financial reporting uses an entity rather than a
proprietary approach in determining what information to report.
CA1.3 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Financial Reporting and Accounting
Standards) Answer the following multiple-choice questions.
1. IFRS stands for:
a. International Federation of Reporting Services.
b. Independent Financial Reporting Standards.
c. International Financial Reporting Standards.
d. Integrated Financial Reporting Services.
2. The major key organizations on the international side are the:
a. IASB and IFRS Advisory Council.
b. IOSCO and the U.S. SEC.
c. London Stock Exchange and International Securities Exchange.
d. IASB and IOSCO.
3. Which governmental body is most influential in enforcing IFRS?
a. Monitoring Board.
b. IFRS Advisory Council.
c. IOSCO.
d. IFRS Foundation.
4. Accounting standard-setters use the following process in
establishing international standards:
a. Research, exposure draft, discussion paper, standard.

--- Page 94 ---
b. Discussion paper, research, exposure draft, standard.
c. Research, preliminary views, discussion paper, standard.
d. Research, preliminary views, exposure draft, standard.
5. IFRS is comprised of:
a. International Financial Reporting Standards and FASB
financial reporting standards.
b. International Financial Reporting Standards, International
Accounting Standards, and International Accounting Standards
Interpretations.
c. International Accounting Standards and International
Accounting Standards Interpretations.
d. FASB financial reporting standards and International
Accounting Standards.
6. The authoritative status of the Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting is as follows:
a. It is used when there is no standard or interpretation related to
the reporting issues under consideration.
b. It is not as authoritative as a standard but takes precedence
over any interpretation related to the reporting issue.
c. It takes precedence over all other authoritative literature.
d. It has no authoritative status.
7. The objective of financial reporting places most emphasis on:
a. reporting to capital providers.
b. reporting on stewardship.
c. providing specific guidance related to specific needs.
d. providing information to individuals who are experts in the
field.
8. General-purpose financial statements are prepared primarily for:
a. internal users.

--- Page 95 ---
b. external users.
c. auditors.
d. government regulators.
9. Economic consequences of accounting standard-setting means:
a. standard-setters must give first priority to ensuring that
companies do not suffer any adverse effect as a result of a new
standard.
b. standard-setters must ensure that no new costs are incurred
when a new standard is issued.
c. the objective of financial reporting should be politically
motivated to ensure acceptance by the general public.
d. accounting standards can have detrimental impacts on the
wealth levels of the providers of financial information.
10. The expectations gap is the difference between:
a. what financial information management provides and what
users want.
b. what the public thinks accountants should do and what
accountants think they can do.
c. what the governmental agencies want from standard-setting
and what the standard-setters provide.
d. what the users of financial statements want from the
government and what is provided.
CA1.4 (LO 1) (Financial Accounting) Omar Morena has recently
completed his first year of studying accounting. His instructor for next
semester has indicated that the primary focus will be the area of
financial accounting.
Instructions
a. Differentiate between financial accounting and managerial
accounting.

--- Page 96 ---
b. One part of financial accounting involves the preparation of
financial statements. What are the financial statements most
frequently provided?
c. What is the difference between financial statements and financial
reporting?
CA1.5 (LO 3) 
 (Need for IASB) Some argue that having
various organizations establish accounting principles is wasteful and
inefficient. Rather than mandating accounting rules, each company
could voluntarily disclose the type of information it considered
important. In addition, if an investor wants additional information, the
investor could contact the company and pay to receive the additional
information desired.
Instructions
Comment on the appropriateness of this viewpoint.
CA1.6 (LO 3) (IASB Role in Standard-Setting) A press release
announcing the appointment of the trustees of the new IFRS
Foundation stated that the International Accounting Standards Board
(to be appointed by the trustees) “… will become the established
authority for setting accounting Standards.”
Instructions
a. Identify the sponsoring organization of the IASB and the process by
which the IASB arrives at a decision and issues an accounting
standard.
b. Indicate the major types of pronouncements issued by the IASB and
the purposes of each of these pronouncements.
CA1.7 (LO 4) (Accounting Numbers and the Environment)
Hardly a day goes by without an article appearing on the crises affecting
many of our financial institutions. It is estimated that the financial crisis
of 2007–2008, for example, caused a deep recession. Some argue that if
financial institutions had been required to report their investments at
fair value instead of cost, large losses would have been reported earlier,

--- Page 97 ---
which would have signaled regulators to close these financial
institutions, therefore minimizing the losses to many investors.
Instructions
Explain how reported accounting numbers might affect an individual’s
perceptions and actions. Cite two examples.
CA1.8 (LO 3, 4) 
 (Politicization of IFRS) Some accountants
have said that politicization in the development and acceptance of
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) is taking place.
Some use the term “politicization” in a narrow sense to mean the
influence by governmental agencies, such as the European Union and
the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, on the development of
IFRS. Others use it more broadly to mean the compromise that results
when the bodies responsible for developing IFRS are pressured by
interest groups, businesses through their various organizations,
financial analysts, bankers, lawyers, academics, auditors, and so on.
Instructions
a. What arguments can be raised to support the “politicization” of
accounting rule-making?
b. What arguments can be raised against the “politicization” of
accounting rule-making?
CA1.9 (LO 3) (Models for Setting IFRS) Presented below are three
models for setting IFRS.
1. The purely political approach, where national legislative action
decrees IFRS.
2. The private, professional approach, where IFRS is set and enforced
by private professional actions only.
3. The public/private mixed approach, where IFRS is basically set by
private-sector bodies that behave as though they were public
agencies and whose standards to a great extent are enforced
through governmental agencies.
Instructions

--- Page 98 ---
a. Which of these three models best describes international standard-
setting? Comment on your answer.
b. Why do companies, financial analysts, labor unions, industry trade
associations, and others take such an active interest in standard-
setting?
CA1.10 (LO 4) (Economic Consequences) Several years ago, then
French President Nicolas Sarkozy urged his European Union
counterparts to put pressure on the IASB to change accounting rules to
give banks and insurers some relief from fair value accounting rules
amid market turmoil. Mr. Sarkozy sought changes to the mark-to-
market accounting rules that have been blamed for aggravating the
crisis.
Instructions
Explain how government intervention could possibly affect capital
markets adversely.
CA1.11 (LO 3, 4) 
 (Rule-Making Issues) When the IASB
issues new pronouncements, the implementation date is usually delayed
for several months from date of issuance, with early implementation
encouraged. Karen Weller, controller, discusses with her financial vice
president the need for early implementation of a rule that would result
in a fairer presentation of the company’s financial condition and
earnings. When the financial vice president determines that early
implementation of the rule will adversely affect the reported net income
for the year, he discourages Weller from implementing the rule until it
is required.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What, if any, is the ethical issue involved in this case?
b. Is the financial vice president acting improperly or immorally?
c. What does Weller have to gain by advocacy of early
implementation?

--- Page 99 ---
d. Which stakeholders might be affected by the early implementation
decision?
CA1.12 (LO 4) 
 (Financial Reporting Pressures) The
following is abbreviated testimony from Troy Normand in the
WorldCom (USA) case. He was a manager in the company reporting
department and was one of five individuals who pleaded guilty. He
testified to avoid prison time.
Q. Mr. Normand, if you could just describe for the jury how the meeting
started and what was said during the meeting?
A. I can’t recall exactly who initiated the discussion, but right away Scott
Sullivan acknowledged that he was aware we had problems with the
entries, David Myers had informed him, and we were considering
resigning.
He said that he respected our concerns but that we weren’t being asked
to do anything that he believed was wrong. He mentioned that he
acknowledged that the company had lost focus quite a bit due to the
preparations for the Sprint merger, and that he was putting plans in
place and projects in place to try to determine where the problems were,
why the costs were so high.
He did say he believed that the initial statements that we produced, that
the line costs in those statements could not have been as high as they
were, that he believes something was wrong and there was no way that
the costs were that high.
I informed him that I didn’t believe the entry we were being asked to do
was right, that I was scared, and I didn’t want to put myself in a position
of going to jail for him or the company. He responded that he didn’t
believe anything was wrong, nobody was going to be going to jail, but
that if it later was found to be wrong, that he would be the person going
to jail, not me.
He asked that I stay, don’t jump off the plane, let him land it softly,
that’s basically how he put it. And he mentioned that he had a
discussion with Bernie Ebbers asking Bernie to reduce projections going
forward and that Bernie had refused.

--- Page 100 ---
Q. Mr. Normand, you said that Mr. Sullivan said something about don’t
jump out of the plane. What did you understand him to mean when he
said that?
A. Not to quit.
Q. During this meeting, did Mr. Sullivan say anything about whether
you would be asked to make entries like this in the future?
A. Yes, he made a comment that from that point going forward we
wouldn’t be asked to record any entries, high-level late adjustments, that
the numbers would be the numbers.
Q. What did you understand that to be mean, the numbers would be the
numbers?
A. That after the preliminary statements were issued, with the exception
of any normal transaction, valid transaction, we wouldn’t be asked to be
recording any more late entries.
Q. I believe you testified that Mr. Sullivan said something about the line
cost numbers not being accurate. Did he ask you to conduct any analysis
to determine whether the line cost numbers were accurate?
A. No, he did not.
Q. Did anyone ever ask you to do that?
A. No.
Q. Did you ever conduct any such analysis?
A. No, I didn’t.
Q. During this meeting, did Mr. Sullivan ever provide any accounting
justification for the entry you were asked to make?
A. No, he did not.
Q. Did anything else happen during the meeting?
A. I don’t recall anything else.
Q. How did you feel after this meeting?
A. Not much better actually. I left his office not convinced in any way
that what we were asked to do was right. However, I did question myself

--- Page 101 ---
to some degree after talking with him wondering whether I was making
something more out of what was really there.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What appears to be the ethical issue involved in this case?
b. Is Troy Normand acting improperly or immorally?
c. What would you do if you were Troy Normand?
d. Who are the major stakeholders in this case?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Lola Otero, a new staff accountant, is confused because of the
complexities involving accounting standard-setting. Specifically, she is
confused by the number of bodies issuing financial reporting standards
of one kind or another and the level of authoritative support that can be
attached to these reporting standards. Lola decides that she must review
the environment in which accounting standards are set, if she is to
increase her understanding of the accounting profession.
Lola recalls that during her accounting education there was a chapter or
two regarding the environment of financial accounting and the
development of IFRS. However, she remembers that her instructor
placed little emphasis on these chapters.
Instructions
a. Help Lola by identifying key organizations involved in accounting
rule-making at the international level.
b. Lola asks for guidance regarding authoritative support. Please assist
her by explaining what is meant by authoritative support.
Financial Reporting Case

--- Page 102 ---
The following comments were made at an Annual Conference of the
Financial Executives Institute (FEI).
There is an irreversible movement toward a single set of rules for
financial reporting throughout the world. The international capital
markets require an end to:
1. The confusion caused by international companies announcing
different results depending on the set of accounting standards
applied.
2. Companies in some countries obtaining unfair commercial
advantages from the use of particular national accounting
standards.
3. The complications in negotiating commercial arrangements for
international joint ventures caused by different accounting
requirements.
4. The inefficiency of international companies having to understand
and use myriad accounting standards depending on the countries in
which they operate and the countries in which they raise capital and
debt. Executive talent is wasted on keeping up to date with
numerous sets of accounting standards and the never-ending
changes to them.
5. The inefficiency of investment managers, bankers, and financial
analysts as they seek to compare financial reporting drawn up in
accordance with different sets of accounting standards.
Instructions
a. What is the International Accounting Standards Board?
b. What stakeholders might benefit from the use of international
accounting standards?
c. What do you believe are some of the major obstacles to
convergence?
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles

--- Page 103 ---
The founders of Oslo Group, Finn Elo and Venden Hakala, are about to
realize their dream of taking their company public. They are trying to
better understand the various legal and accounting issues they will face
as a public company.
Accounting
a. What are some of the reporting requirements that their company
will have to comply with when they offer securities to investors and
creditors?
b. Identify the two entities that are primarily responsible for
establishing IFRS, which will be applied when preparing their
financial statements. Explain the relationship of these two
organizations to one another.
Analysis
a. What is decision-usefulness?
b. Briefly describe how the financial statements that Oslo prepares for
its investors and creditors will contribute to decision-usefulness.
Principles
Oslo will prepare its statements in conformity with IFRS. Finn and
Venden have heard about an IFRS hierarchy. Briefly explain this
hierarchy and advise them on how the hierarchy affects the application
of IFRS.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 1, The
Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting” (London, U.K.: IASB,
2018), par. 2.
[2] The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 1,
The Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting” (London, U.K.:
IASB, 2018), paras. 3–4.

--- Page 104 ---
[3] International Accounting Standard 8, Accounting Policies, Changes
in Accounting Estimates and Errors (London, U.K.: IASB, 1993), par. 12.
Research Case
As a newly enrolled accounting major, you are anxious to better
understand accounting institutions and sources of accounting literature.
As a first step, you decide to explore the IASB’s Conceptual Framework
for Financial Reporting.
Instructions
Access the Conceptual Framework at the IFRS website (you may register
for free IFRS access at this site). When you have accessed the document,
you can use the search tool in your Internet browser to respond to the
following items. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. What is the objective of financial reporting?
b. Explain the role of presentation and disclosure principles to
facilitate communication in financial statements.
c. Indicate some of the users and the information they are most
directly concerned with in economic decision-making.
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Compare IFRS and U.S. GAAP and their standard-setting processes.
Most agree that there is a need for one set of international accounting
standards. Here is why:
Multinational companies. Today’s companies view the entire
world as their market. For example, many companies find their
largest market is not in their home country.
Mergers and acquisitions. The mergers that led to international
giants Kraft/Cadbury (USA and GBR) and

--- Page 105 ---
Vodafone/Mannesmann (GBR and DEU) suggest that we will
see even more such mergers in the future.
A single set of high-quality accounting standards ensures adequate
comparability. Investors are able to make better investment
decisions if they receive financial information from a U.S. company
that is comparable to an international competitor.
Information technology. As communication barriers continue to
topple through advances in technology, companies and individuals
in different countries and markets are becoming comfortable
buying and selling goods and services from one another.
Financial markets. Financial markets are some of the most
significant international markets today. Whether it is currency,
equity securities (shares), bonds, or derivatives, there are active
markets throughout the world trading these types of instruments.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP
(the standards issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board) and
IFRS related to the financial reporting environment.
Similarities
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) for U.S.
companies are developed by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board (FASB). The FASB is a private organization. The U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) exercises oversight
over the actions of the FASB. The IASB is also a private
organization. Oversight over the actions of the IASB is regulated by
IOSCO.
Both the IASB and the FASB have essentially the same governance
structure, that is, a Foundation that provides oversight, a Board, an
Advisory Council, and an Interpretations Committee. In addition, a
general body that involves the public interest is part of the
governance structure.
The FASB relies on the U.S. SEC for regulation and enforcement of
its standards. The IASB relies primarily on IOSCO for regulation

--- Page 106 ---
and enforcement of its standards.
Both the IASB and the FASB are working together to find common
ground wherever possible.
Differences
U.S. GAAP is more detailed or rules-based. IFRS tends to be simpler
and more flexible in the accounting and disclosure requirements.
The difference in approach has resulted in a debate about the merits
of principles-based versus rules-based standards.
Differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS should not be surprising
because standard-setters have developed standards in response to
different user needs. In some countries, the primary users of
financial statements are private investors. In others, the primary
users are tax authorities or central government planners. In the
United States, investors and creditors have driven accounting-
standard formulation.
About the Numbers
The FASB and its predecessor organizations have been developing
standards for nearly 80 years. The IASB is a relatively new organization
(formed in 2001). As a result, it has looked to the United States to
determine the structure it should follow in establishing IFRS. Thus, the
international standard-setting structure (presented in Illustration 1.4) is
very similar to the U.S. standard-setting structure. Presented below is a
chart of the FASB’s standard-setting structure.

--- Page 107 ---
On the Horizon
Both the IASB and the FASB are hard at work developing standards that
will lead to the elimination of major differences in the way certain
transactions are accounted for and reported. In fact, beginning in 2010,
the IASB (and the FASB on its joint projects with the IASB) started its
policy of phasing in adoption of new major standards over several years.
The major reason for this policy is to provide companies time to
translate and implement international standards into practice.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. GAAP (for U.S. companies) stands for:
a. Government accepted accounting practices.
b. Generally accepted auditing policies.
c. Generally accepted accounting principles.
d. Gevernment approved accounting principles.
2. Oversight of accounting standard-setting is as follows:
a. IASB oversees FASB.
b. IOSCO oversees both the IASB and FASB.
c. SEC oversees both the IASB and FASB.

--- Page 108 ---
d. SEC oversees FASB, IOSCO oversees IASB.
3. Governance of the FASB involves:
a. FASB, FAF, FASAC, and IOSCO.
b. FASB, FAF, FASAC, and staff and task forces.
c. FASB, FAF, IASB, and task forces.
d. FASB, FAF, IASB, and the SEC.
4. Which of the following statements is false?
a. FASB is a government office within the SEC.
b. The FASB and IASB have similar governance structures.
c. U.S. GAAP is generally viewed as more detailed or rules-based; IFRS
is viewed as more principles-based.
d. The SEC oversees FASB standard-setting.
5. Which of the following statements is true?
a. The IASB does not include the public interest in its governance.
b. The IASB structure has both advisory and interpretation functions,
but no Foundation.
c. The IASB has been in existence longer than the FASB.
d. The IASB structure is quite similar to the FASB’s, with a
Foundation, Board, Advisory Council, and Interpretations
Committee.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP1.1 What organizations are the two key players in the
development of U.S. GAAP? Explain their role.
GAAP1.2 What might explain the fact that different accounting
standard-setters have developed accounting standards that are
sometimes quite different in nature?

--- Page 109 ---
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. d 3. b 4. a 5. d
Notes
1 Robert H. Herz, “Towards a Global Reporting System: Where Are We
and Where Are We Going?” AICPA National Conference on SEC and
PCAOB Reporting Developments (December 10, 2007).
2 As used here, cash flow means “cash generated and used in
operations.” The term cash flows also frequently means cash
obtained by borrowing and used to repay borrowing, cash used for
investments in resources and obtained from the disposal of
investments, and cash contributed by or distributed to owners.
3 The IASB was preceded by the International Accounting Standards
Committee (IASC), which came into existence on June 29, 1973, as a
result of an agreement by professional accountancy bodies in
Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, Mexico, the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom and Ireland, and the United States. A revised
agreement and constitution was signed in November 1982 and was
updated most recently in 2009. The constitution mandates that all
standards and interpretations issued under previous constitutions
continue to be applicable unless and until they are amended or
withdrawn. When the term IFRS is used in this textbook, it includes
standards and interpretations approved by the IASB, and
International Accounting Standards (IAS) and Standards
Interpretations Committee (SIC) interpretations issued under
previous constitutions.
4 IASB membership reflects geographical representation, generally with
members from Europe, the Americas, Asia–Oceania, and Africa.
5 In rare cases, compliance with a standard or interpretation is judged to
be misleading when it conflicts with the objective of financial
reporting. In this case, it is possible to have what is referred to as a
“true and fair override.” If this occurs, extensive disclosure is required
to explain the rationale for this unusual exception.

--- Page 110 ---
6 However, as IASB chairperson Hans Hoogervorst noted, “It is not
always obvious what is lobbying by vested interests and what is public
interest feedback whose purpose is to help us deliver a high quality
standard. More often than not the vested interest is packaged in
public interest arguments. Sometimes even users do not want change.
Analysts are so much in love with their own models that they do not
want our standards to shed light on complex issues.” See
“Strengthening Institutional Relationships,”
www.ifrs.org/-/media/feature/news/speeches/2013/hans-
hoogervorst-wss-september-2013.pdf.
7 Economic consequences means the impact of accounting reports on
the wealth positions of issuers and users of financial information and
the decision-making behavior resulting from that impact. The
resulting behavior of these individuals and groups could have
detrimental financial effects on the providers of the financial
information. See Stephen A. Zeff, “The Rise of ‘Economic
Consequences’,” Journal of Accountancy (December 1978), pp. 56–
63.
8 The chairperson of the IASB recently noted that the notion of the
United States embracing IFRS is politically dead. The IASB is now
taking the position that it will attempt both to avoid divergence and to
favor convergence between IFRS and U.S. GAAP wherever possible.
Staying converged can be challenging, as illustrated by the Boards’
deliberations on sustainability reporting and the accounting for
goodwill. In the case of goodwill, the FASB has floated the idea of
allowing companies to amortize goodwill (and avoid the cost of
annual impairment testing). The IASB has been opposed to such an
approach. See M. Cohn, “Sustainability Standards Seen as Too
Fragmented,” www.accountingtoday.com/news/sustainability-
standards-seen-as-too-fragmented (October 17, 2019); and M. Mauer,
“U.S., International Accounting Rule Makers Differ on Goodwill
Amortization,” Wall Street Journal (October 17, 2019).
Sources: Adapted from P. Pacter, Pocket Guide to IFRS® Standards—The Global Financial
Reporting Language (2017); www.ifrs.org/use-around-the-world/why-global-accounting-
standards; and www.fsa.go.jp/en/news/2015/20151113-1/01.pdf.

--- Page 111 ---
