CHAPTER 24
Presentation and Disclosure in Financial Reporting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the full disclosure principle and how it is implemented.
2. Discuss the disclosure requirements for related-party transactions, subsequent
events, major business segments, and interim reporting.
3. Identify the major disclosures in the auditor’s report and management’s
responsibilities for the financial statements.
4. Describe other reporting issues related to implementation of the full disclosure
principle.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 24
As the following opening story indicates, investors and other interested parties are
concerned about the quality of information for all aspects of financial reporting—the
financial statements, the notes, the president’s letter, and management commentary. In
this chapter, we cover the full disclosure principle in more detail and examine
disclosures that must accompany financial statements so that they are not misleading.
The content and organization of this chapter are as follows.
We Need Better, Not More
As you have learned in your study of this text, financial statements contain a wealth of useful
information to help investors and creditors assess the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of
future cash flows. In addition, the usefulness of accounting reports is enhanced when
companies provide note disclosures to help statement readers understand how IFRS was

--- Page 2193 ---
applied to transactions. These additional disclosures help readers understand both the
judgments that management made and how those judgments affected the amount reported
in the financial statements. Some users, however, feel we need to go even further.
The IASB has heard these demands for improved financial reporting and disclosure and is
responding. It organized a Discussion Forum and conducted a survey of preparers and users
to get input on the effectiveness of reporting and disclosure in financial statements. The
survey asked whether there is a disclosure problem and, if so, where in the annual report the
problem arises. The survey focused on three potential areas: (1) not enough relevant
information, (2) too much irrelevant information, and (3) poor communication of
disclosures. The accompanying graphic summarizes the feedback.
As indicated, preparers viewed the disclosure problem as primarily one of information
overload; that is, they are being required to provide too much data. Users, on the other hand,
complained that some of the information they get is poorly communicated and not that
relevant. The message that emerged from the Discussion Forum was similar. Specifically,
increases in the volume of financial disclosures have resulted in a perceived reduction in
their quality and usefulness. More importantly, there was broad consensus that collective
action was required in order for improvements to be made.
As a result, the IASB has taken action in several areas:
1. The IASB implemented amendments to IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements to
encourage companies to apply professional judgment in determining what information
to disclose in their financial statements. Specifically, the amendments make clear that
materiality applies to the whole of financial statements and that the inclusion of
immaterial information can inhibit the usefulness of financial disclosures.
2. The IASB amended IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows to require a disclosure of changes in
liabilities arising from financing activities, including changes arising from cash flows
and non-cash changes.
3. The IASB added a “better communication in financial reporting” theme to its agenda.
This theme includes a number of projects, including adjusting the content of the
primary financial statements, updating the previously issued practice statement on
management commentary, and issuing a practice statement related to making
materiality judgments. The practice statement includes a process for making such

--- Page 2194 ---
judgments.1 In addition, guidance on specific topics that often involve materiality
judgments, including prior period reporting, errors, and interim reporting, is included.
Hans Hoogervorst, chair of the IASB, summarized the IASB’s response as follows: “It is
undoubtedly true that we and others can improve our [disclosure] requirements. However,
material improvements will require behavioural change to ensure that financial statements
are regarded as tools of communication rather than compliance. That means addressing the
root causes of why preparers may err on the side of caution and ‘kitchen-sink’ their
disclosures.” The bottom line: We need better, not necessarily more, disclosure.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions,
are also available online.
Full Disclosure Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the full disclosure principle and how it is implemented.
The IASB Conceptual Framework notes that while some useful information is best provided
in the financial statements, some is best provided by other means. For example, net income
and cash flows are readily available in financial statements, but investors might do better to
look at comparisons to other companies in the same industry, found in news articles or
brokerage house reports.
IASB rules directly affect financial statements, notes to the financial statements, and
supplementary information. These accounting standards provide guidance on recognition
and measurement of amounts reported in the financial statements. However, due to the
many judgments involved in applying IFRS, note disclosures provide important information
about the application of IFRS. Supplementary information includes items such as disclosures
about the risks and uncertainties, resources and obligations not recognized in the statement
of financial position (such as mineral reserves), and information about geographical and
industry segments. Other types of information found in the annual report, such as
management commentary and the letters to shareholders, are not subject to IASB rules. [1]
(See the Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.)
Illustration 24.1 indicates the various types of financial information.

--- Page 2195 ---
ILLUSTRATION 24.1 Types of Financial Information
As Chapter 2 indicated, the profession has adopted a full disclosure principle. The full
disclosure principle calls for financial reporting of any financial facts significant
enough to influence the judgment of an informed reader. In some situations, the
benefits of disclosure may be apparent but the costs uncertain. In other instances, the costs
may be certain but the benefits of disclosure not as apparent.
For example, the IASB requires companies to provide expanded disclosures about their
contractual obligations. In light of the accounting frauds at companies such as Steinhoff
International (ZAF), the benefits of these expanded disclosures seem fairly obvious to the
investing public. While no one has documented the exact costs of disclosure in these
situations, they would appear to be relatively small.
On the other hand, the cost of disclosure can be substantial in some cases and the benefits
difficult to assess. For example, at one time the financial press reported that if segment
reporting were adopted, a company such as Fruehauf (USA) would have had to increase its
accounting staff 50 percent, from 300 to 450 individuals. In this case, the cost of disclosure
can be measured, but the benefits are less well defined (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
Here is a good example of the trade-off between cost considerations and the benefits of
full disclosure.
Some even argue that the reporting requirements are so detailed and substantial that users
have a difficult time absorbing the information. These critics charge the profession with
engaging in information overload.
Financial disasters at Mahindra Satyam (IND) and Société Générale (FRA) highlight the
difficulty of implementing the full disclosure principle. They raise the issue of why investors

--- Page 2196 ---
were not aware of potential problems: Was the information these companies presented not
comprehensible? Was it buried? Was it too technical? Was it properly presented and fully
disclosed as of the financial statement date, but the situation later deteriorated? Or was it
simply not presented? In the following sections, we describe the elements of high-quality
disclosure that will enable companies to avoid these disclosure pitfalls.
Increase in Reporting Requirements
Disclosure requirements have increased substantially. One survey showed that the size of
many companies’ annual reports is growing in response to demands for increased
transparency. For example, annual report page counts ranged from 164 pages for Wm
Morrison Supermarkets plc (GBR) up to over 200 pages in Puma’s (DEU) annual
report. This result is not surprising; as illustrated throughout this text, the IASB has issued
many pronouncements in the last 10 years that have substantial disclosure provisions.
The reasons for this increase in disclosure requirements are varied. Some of them are:
Complexity of the business environment. The increasing complexity of business
operations magnifies the difficulty of distilling economic events into summarized
reports. Areas such as derivatives, leasing, business combinations, pensions, financing
arrangements, revenue recognition, and deferred taxes are complex. As a result,
companies extensively use notes to the financial statements to explain these
transactions and their future effects.
Necessity for timely information. Today, more than ever before, users are
demanding information that is current and predictive. For example, users want more
complete interim data.
Accounting as a control and monitoring device. Regulators have increasingly
sought public disclosure of such phenomena as management compensation, off-balance-
sheet financing arrangements, and related-party transactions. Many of these newer
disclosure requirements enlist accountants and auditors as the agents to assist in
controlling and monitoring these concerns (see Underlying Concepts).2
Underlying Concepts
Surveys indicate that to meet users’ changing needs, business reporting must (1) provide
more forward-looking information; (2) focus more on the factors that create longer-
term value, including non-financial measures; and (3) better align information reported
externally with the information reported internally.
Differential Disclosure
A trend toward differential disclosure is also occurring. The IASB has developed IFRS for
small- and medium-sized entities (SMEs). SMEs are entities that publish general-purpose
financial statements for external users but do not issue shares or other securities in a public
market. SMEs are estimated to account for over 95 percent of all companies around the
world. Many believe a simplified set of standards makes sense for these companies because
they do not have the resources to implement full IFRS.

--- Page 2197 ---
Simplified IFRS for SMEs is designed to meet their needs and capabilities. Compared with
full IFRS (and many national accounting standards), simplified IFRS for SMEs is less
complex in a number of ways:
Topics not relevant for SMEs are omitted. Examples are earnings per share, interim
financial reporting, and segment reporting.
Simplified IFRS for SMEs allows fewer accounting policy choices. For example, there is
no option to revalue property, equipment, or intangibles.
Many principles for recognizing and measuring assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses
are simplified. For example, goodwill is amortized (as a result, there is no annual
impairment test) and all borrowing and R&D costs are expensed.
Significantly fewer disclosures are required (roughly 300 versus 3,000).
To further reduce standard overload, revisions to the IFRS for SMEs will be limited to
once every three years.
Thus, the option of using simplified IFRS helps SMEs meet the needs of their financial
statement users while balancing the costs and benefits from a preparer perspective. [2]
Notes to the Financial Statements
As you know from your study of this text, notes are an integral part of the financial
statements of a business enterprise. However, readers of financial statements often overlook
them because they are highly technical and often appear in small print. Notes are the
means of amplifying or explaining the items presented in the main body of the
statements. They can explain in qualitative terms information pertinent to specific
financial statement items. In addition, they can provide supplementary data of a quantitative
nature to expand the information in the financial statements. Notes also can explain
restrictions imposed by financial arrangements or basic contractual agreements. Although
notes may be technical and difficult to understand, they provide meaningful information for
the user of the financial statements.
Accounting Policies
Accounting policies are the specific principles, bases, conventions, rules, and practices
applied by a company in preparing and presenting financial statements. IFRS states that
information about the accounting policies adopted by a reporting entity is essential for
financial statement users in making economic decisions. It recommends that companies
should present as an integral part of the financial statements a statement
identifying the accounting policies adopted and followed by the reporting entity.
Companies whose financial statements comply with IFRS must make an explicit and
unreserved statement of such compliance. Companies should present the disclosure as the
first note or in a separate Summary of Significant Accounting Policies section preceding the
notes to the financial statements.
The Summary of Significant Accounting Policies answers such questions as: What method of
depreciation is used on plant assets? What valuation method is employed on inventories?
What amortization policy is followed in regard to intangible assets? How are marketing costs
handled for financial reporting purposes? You can see a good example of note disclosure for

--- Page 2198 ---
Marks and Spencer plc (GBR) (which accompanies the financial statements presented in
Appendix A) at the company’s website.
Analysts examine carefully the summary of accounting policies to determine whether a
company is taking a conservative or an aggressive approach to accounting practices. For
example, depreciating plant assets over an unusually long period of time is considered
aggressive. Using weighted-average inventory valuation in a period of inflation is generally
viewed as conservative.
In addition to disclosure of significant accounting policies, companies must:
1. Identify the judgments that management made in applying the accounting policies
which have the most significant effect on the amounts recognized in the financial
statements, and
2. Disclose management’s assumptions about the future (and other major sources of
estimation uncertainty at the end of the reporting period), that have a significant risk of
resulting in a material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities
within the next financial year. In respect to those assets and liabilities, the notes should
include details of (a) their nature and (b) their carrying amount as of the end of the
reporting period.
Many times these disclosures are presented with the accounting policy note or provided in a
specific policy note. The disclosures should identify the estimates that require management’s
most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. [3] An example of this disclosure is
presented in Illustration 24.2 for International Airlines Group (GBR).

--- Page 2199 ---
International Airlines Group
2. Significant accounting policies
Critical accounting judgements, estimates (in part) and assumptions
The preparation of financial statements requires management to make judgements,
estimates and assumptions that affect the application of policies and reported amounts of
assets and liabilities, income and expenses. These judgements, estimates and associated
assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors believed to be
reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results in the future may differ from
judgements and estimates upon which financial information has been prepared. These
underlying assumptions are reviewed on an ongoing basis. Revisions to accounting
estimates are recognised prospectively.
Revenue recognition
Passenger revenue is recognised when the transportation is provided. At the time of
transportation, revenue is also recognised in respect of tickets that are not expected to be
used (‘unused tickets’). Revenue associated with unused tickets is estimated based on the
terms and conditions of the tickets and historical trends.
Revenue associated with the issuance of points under customer loyalty programmes is
based on the relative stand-alone selling prices of the related performance obligations
(brand, marketing and points), determined using estimation techniques. The transaction
price of brand and marketing services is determined using specific brand valuation
methodologies. The transaction price of the points is based on the value of the awards for
which the points can be redeemed and is reduced to take account of the proportion of the
award credits that are not expected to be redeemed by customers. The Group estimates the
number of points not expected to be redeemed (using statistical modelling and historical
trends) and the mix and fair value of the award credits. A one percentage point change in the
assumption of points not expected to be redeemed will result in an adjustment to deferred
revenue of €100 million, with an offsetting adjustment to revenue and operating profit
recognised in the year.
The following estimate involves a higher degree of judgement or complexity, or is where
assumptions are significant to the financial statements. However, this accounting estimate
is not a major source of estimation uncertainty that has a significant risk of resulting in
material adjustment to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next year.
Impairment of non-financial assets
The Group assesses whether there are any indicators of impairment for all non-financial
assets at each reporting date. Goodwill and intangible assets with indefinite economic lives
are tested for impairment annually and at other times when such indicators exist. The
recoverable amounts of cash-generating units have been determined based on value-in-use
calculations. These calculations require the use of estimates and assumptions as disclosed
in note 14.

--- Page 2200 ---
Other non-financial assets are tested for impairment when there are indicators that the
carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
ILLUSTRATION 24.2 Accounting Estimate and Judgment Disclosure
Collectively, these disclosures help statement readers evaluate the quality of a company’s
accounting policies in providing information in the financial statements for assessing future
cash flows. Companies that fail to adopt high-quality reporting policies may be heavily
penalized by the market. For example, when Isoft (GBR) disclosed that it would restate
prior-year results due to use of aggressive revenue recognition policies, its share price
dropped over 39 percent in one day. Investors viewed Isoft’s quality of earnings as low.
Common Notes
We have discussed many of the notes to the financial statements throughout this text
and will discuss others more fully in this chapter. The more common are as follows.

--- Page 2201 ---
Major Disclosures
Inventory. Companies should report the basis upon which inventory amounts are
stated (lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value) and the method used in determining cost
(FIFO, average-cost, etc.). Manufacturers should report, either in the statement of
financial position or in a separate schedule in the notes, the inventory composition
(finished goods, work in process, raw materials). Unusual or significant financing
arrangements relating to inventories that may require disclosure include transactions
with related parties, product financing arrangements, firm purchase commitments, and
pledging of inventories as collateral. Chapter 9 illustrates these disclosures.
Property, Plant, and Equipment. Companies should state the basis of valuation for
property, plant, and equipment (e.g., revaluation or historical cost). It is usually
historical cost. Companies also should disclose pledges, liens, and other commitments
related to these assets. In the presentation of depreciation, companies should disclose
the following in the financial statements or in the notes: (1) depreciation expense for the
period; (2) balances of major classes of depreciable assets, by nature and function, at the
statement date; (3) accumulated depreciation, either by major classes of depreciable
assets or in total, at the statement date; and (4) a general description of the method or
methods used in computing depreciation with respect to major classes of depreciable
assets. Finally, companies should explain any major impairments. Chapter 11 illustrates
these disclosures.
Creditor Claims. Investors normally find it extremely useful to understand the nature
and cost of creditor claims. However, the liabilities section in the statement of financial
position can provide the major types of liabilities only in the aggregate. Note schedules
regarding such obligations provide additional information about how a company is
financing its operations, the costs that it will bear in future periods, and the timing of
future cash outflows. Financial statements must disclose for each of the five years
following the date of the statements, the aggregate amount of maturities and sinking
fund requirements for all long-term borrowings. Chapter 14 illustrates these disclosures.
Equityholders’ Claims. Many companies present in the body of the statement of
financial position information about equity securities: the number of shares authorized,
issued, and outstanding and the par value for each type of security. They may also
present such data in a note. Beyond that, a common equity note disclosure relates to
contracts and senior securities outstanding that might affect the various claims of the
residual equity holders. An example would be the existence of outstanding share
options, outstanding convertible debt, redeemable preference shares, and convertible
preference shares. In addition, it is necessary to disclose certain types of restrictions
currently in force. Generally, these types of restrictions involve the amount of earnings
available for dividend distribution. Examples of these types of disclosures are illustrated
in Chapter 15 and Chapter 16.
Contingencies and Commitments. A company may have gain or loss contingencies
that are not disclosed in the body of the financial statements. These contingencies
include litigation, debt and other guarantees, possible tax assessments, renegotiation of
government contracts, and sales of receivables with recourse. In addition, companies
should disclose in the notes commitments that relate to dividend restrictions, purchase

--- Page 2202 ---
agreements (through-put and take-or-pay), hedge contracts, and employment contracts.
Disclosures of such items are illustrated in Chapter 7, Chapter 9, and Chapter 13.
Fair Values. Companies that have assets or liabilities measured at fair value generally
disclose both the cost and the fair value in the notes to the financial statements. Fair
value measurements may be used for many financial assets and liabilities; investments;
revaluations for property, plant, and equipment; impairments of long-lived assets; and
some contingencies. Companies also provide disclosure of information that enables
users to determine the extent of usage of fair value and the inputs used to implement
fair value measurement. This fair value hierarchy identifies three broad levels related to
the measurement of fair values (Levels 1, 2, and 3). The levels indicate the subjectivity
of the measurement of fair value information. Chapter 17 discusses in detail fair value
disclosures.
Deferred Taxes, Pensions, and Leases. The IASB also requires extensive disclosure
in the areas of deferred taxes, pensions, and leases. Chapter 19, Chapter 20, and Chapter
21 discuss in detail each of these disclosures. Users of financial statements should
carefully read notes to the financial statements for information about off-balance-sheet
commitments, future financing needs, and the quality of a company’s earnings.
Changes in Accounting Policies. The profession defines various types of accounting
changes and establishes guides for reporting each type. Companies discuss, either in the
summary of significant accounting policies or in the other notes, changes in accounting
policies (as well as material changes in estimates and corrections of errors). See Chapter
22.
In earlier chapters, we discussed the disclosures listed above. The following sections of this
chapter illustrate four additional disclosures of significance—special transactions or events,
subsequent events, segment reporting, and interim reporting.

--- Page 2203 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Footnote Secrets
Often, note disclosures are needed to give a complete picture of a company’s financial
position. A good example is the required disclosure of collateral arrangements in
repurchase agreements. Such arrangements gained front-page coverage when it was
revealed that the now-defunct Lehman Brothers (USA)—and many other U.S. and
European financial institutions—employed specialized repurchase agreements, referred
to as Repo 105 (or Repo 108 in Europe), to “window-dress” their statements of financial
positions. Here’s how it works.
A repurchase agreement amounts to a short-term loan, exchanging collateral for cash
upfront and then unwinding the trade as soon as overnight. Lehman’s Repo 105 used a
variety of holdings as the collateral. Lehman made the exchanges with major global
financial institutions, such as Barclays (GBR), UBS (CHE), Mitsubishi UFJ
Financial Group (JPN), and KBC Bank (BEL). What was special about the Repo
105/108 is that the value of the securities Lehman pledged in the transactions was
worth 105 percent of the cash it received. That is, the firm was taking a haircut on the
transactions. And when Lehman eventually repaid the cash it received from its
counterparties, it did so with interest, making this a rather expensive technique. Under
accounting guidance at that time, Lehman could book each transaction as a “sale” rather
than a “financing,” as most repos are regarded. That meant that for a few days, Lehman
could exclude tens of billions of dollars in assets to appear more financially healthy than
it really was.
Another recent example is the accounting for media content expenses compared to the
true cost. For a company like Netflix (USA), its increased licensing fees are recognized
in income on a delayed basis. In 2014 alone, Netflix paid $500 million more to add to its
library than it recognized in expenses. These differences represented about 10 percent of
expenses and would have reduced EPS from $4.32 to –$1.31. Netflix’s accounting
follows the rules, but you might not be able to compare it to the growing number of
global media competitors that could be using different accounting policies for program
costs.
How can you be better informed about note disclosures that may contain important
information related to your investments, like Repo 105 and media content costs? The
Calcbench (USA) website provides a good online resource for understanding the
contents of note disclosures. The site highlights insights that can be gained by mining
the information in financial statements, including footnotes. For example, some recent
reports on the site have highlighted such issues as the substantial changes revealed by
the new leasing standard (such as at Starbucks (USA), different discounts rates used
by companies, and recent changes in product warranty accruals.
Sources: Gretchen Morgenson, “Annual Reports: More Pages, but Better?” The New York Times (March 17,
2002); M. de la Merced and J. Werdigier, “The Origins of Lehman’s ‘Repo 105’,” The New York Times (March 12,
2010); New Constructs, “Three Ways Accounting Tricks Hidden in Footnotes Can Blow Up Your Portfolio,”
Diligence Pays (September 23, 2015); and “A Look at Product Warranty Accruals,” Calcbench Blog (November 12,
2019).

--- Page 2204 ---
Disclosure Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Discuss the disclosure requirements for related-party transactions, subsequent events,
major business segments, and interim reporting.
Disclosure of Special Transactions or Events
Related-party transactions, errors, and fraud pose especially sensitive and difficult problems.
The accountant/auditor who has responsibility for reporting on these types of transactions
must take care to properly balance the rights of the reporting company and the needs of
financial statement users.
Related-party transactions arise when a company engages in transactions in which one
of the parties has the ability to significantly influence the policies of the other. They may also
occur when a non-transacting party has the ability to influence the policies of the two
transacting parties.3 Competitive, free-market dealings may not exist in related-party
transactions, and so an “arm’s-length” basis cannot be assumed. Transactions such as
borrowing or lending money at abnormally low or high interest rates, real estate sales at
amounts that differ significantly from appraised value, exchanges of non-monetary assets,
and transactions involving companies that have no economic substance (shell corporations)
suggest that related parties may be involved.
In order to make adequate disclosure, companies should report the economic substance,
rather than the legal form, of these transactions. IFRS requires the following minimum
disclosures of material related-party transactions. [5]
1. The nature of the related-party relationship;
2. The amount of the transactions and the amount of outstanding balances, including
commitments, the nature of consideration, and details of any guarantees given or
received;
3. Provisions for doubtful debts related to the amount of outstanding balances; and
4. The expense recognized during the period with respect to bad or doubtful debts due from
related parties.
Illustration 24.3, from the annual report of Volkswagen AG (DEU), shows disclosure of
related-party transactions.

--- Page 2205 ---
Volkswagen AG
Note 44. Related Parties
The following tables present the amount of supplies and services transacted, as well as
receivable and liabilities, between consolidated companies of the Volkswagen Group and
related parties.
Supplies &
Services
Rendered
Supplies &
Services
Received
(€ million)
2018
2017
2018
2017
Porsche SE and its majority interests
3
7
3
1
Supervisory Board members
4
2
2
2
Unconsolidated subsidiaries
1,137
1,029
1,649
1,300
Joint ventures and their majority interests
16,724
14,294
491
1,225
Associates and their majority interests
194
214
1,267
733
Pension plans
1
1
2
0
Other related parties
0
0
1
0
State of Lower Saxony, its majority interests and
joint ventures
10
11
8
9
Receivables 
From
Liabilities
To
(€ million)
2018
2017
2018
2017
Porsche SE and its majority interests
4
13
1
0
Supervisory Board members
0
0
205
254
Board of Management members
0
0
78
72
Unconsolidated subsidiaries
1,319
1,480
1,869
1,773
Joint ventures and their majority interests
11,989
9,889
2,671
2,168
Associates and their majority interests
112
76
487
572
Pension plans
1
1
—
—
Other related parties
—
—
100
63
State of Lower Saxony, its majority interests and
joint ventures
1
2
2
1
ILLUSTRATION 24.3 Disclosure of Related-Party Transactions
Many companies are involved in related-party transactions. However, another type of special
event, errors and fraud (sometimes referred to as irregularities), is the exception rather than
the rule. Accounting errors are unintentional mistakes, whereas fraud (misappropriation

--- Page 2206 ---
of assets and fraudulent financial reporting) involves intentional distortions of financial
statements.4 As indicated earlier, companies should correct financial statements when they
discover errors. Fraud should be given the same treatment. Its discovery gives rise to a
different set of procedures and responsibilities for the accountant/auditor, however.
Disclosure plays an important role in these types of transactions because the events are
many times more qualitative than quantitative and involve more subjective than objective
evaluation. Users of the financial statements need some indication of the existence and
nature of these transactions, through disclosures, modifications in the auditor’s report, or
reports of changes in auditors.
Events After the Reporting Period (Subsequent Events)
Notes to the financial statements should explain any significant financial events that took
place after the formal statement of financial position date, but before the statements are
authorized for issuance (hereafter referred to as the authorization date). These events are
referred to as events after the reporting date or subsequent events. Illustration 24.4
shows a time diagram of the subsequent events period.
ILLUSTRATION 24.4 Time Periods for Subsequent Events
A period of several weeks or sometimes months may elapse after the end of the fiscal year
but before the management or the board of directors authorizes issuance of the financial
statements.5 Various activities involved in closing the books for the period and issuing the
statements take time: taking and costing the inventory, reconciling subsidiary ledgers with
controlling accounts, preparing necessary adjusting entries, ensuring that all transactions for
the period have been entered, obtaining an audit of the financial statements by independent
certified public accountants, and printing the annual report. During the period between the
statement of financial position date and its authorization date, important transactions or
other events may occur that materially affect the company’s financial position or operating
situation.
Many who read a statement of financial position believe the financial condition is constant,
and they project it into the future. However, readers must be told if the company has
experienced a significant change—e.g., sold one of its plants, acquired a subsidiary, suffered
unusual losses, settled significant litigation, or experienced any other important event—in
the post-statement of financial position period. Without an explanation in a note, the reader
might be misled and draw inappropriate conclusions (see Underlying Concepts).

--- Page 2207 ---
Underlying Concepts
The periodicity or time period assumption implies that economic activities of an
enterprise can be divided into artificial time periods for purpose of analysis.
Two types of events or transactions occurring after the statement of financial position date
may have a material effect on the financial statements or may need disclosure so that readers
interpret these statements accurately:
1. Events that provide additional evidence about conditions that existed at the statement
of financial position date, including the estimates inherent in the process of preparing
financial statements. These are referred to as adjusted subsequent events and
require adjustments to the financial statements. All information available prior to the
authorization date of the financial statements helps investors and creditors evaluate
previous estimates. To ignore these subsequent events is to neglect an opportunity to
improve the accuracy of the financial statements. This first type of event encompasses
information that an accountant would have recorded in the accounts had the
information been known at the statement of financial position date.
For example, if a loss on an account receivable results from a customer’s bankruptcy
subsequent to the statement of financial position date, the company adjusts the
financial statements before their issuance. The bankruptcy stems from the customer’s
poor financial health existing at the statement of financial position date.
The same criterion applies to settlements of litigation. The company must adjust the
financial statements if the events that gave rise to the litigation, such as personal injury
or patent infringement, took place prior to the statement of financial position date.
2. Events that provide evidence about conditions that did not exist at the statement of
financial position date but which arise subsequent to that date. These events are referred
as non-adjusted subsequent events and do not require adjustment of the financial
statements. To illustrate, a loss resulting from a customer’s fire or flood after the
statement of financial position date does not reflect conditions existing at that date.
Thus, adjustment of the financial statements is not necessary. A company should not
recognize subsequent events that provide evidence about conditions that did not exist at
the date of the statement of financial position but which arose after the statement of
financial position date.
The following are examples of non-adjusted subsequent events:
A major business combination after the reporting period or disposing of a major
subsidiary.
Announcing a plan to discontinue an operation or to commence the implementation of a
major restructuring.
Major purchases of assets, other disposals of assets, or expropriation of major assets by
government.
The destruction of a major production plant or inventories by a fire or natural disaster
after the reporting period.

--- Page 2208 ---
Major ordinary share transactions and potential ordinary share transactions after the
reporting period.
Abnormally large changes after the reporting period in asset prices, foreign exchange
rates, or taxes.
Entering into significant commitments or contingent liabilities, for example, by issuing
significant guarantees after the statement date. [7]6
Some non-adjusted subsequent events may have to be disclosed to keep the financial
statements from being misleading. For such events, a company discloses the nature of the
event and an estimate of its financial effect (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
A company also should consider supplementing the historical financial statements with
pro forma financial data. Occasionally, a non-adjusted subsequent event may be so
significant that disclosure can best be made by means of pro forma financial data.
Illustration 24.5 presents an example of subsequent events disclosure, excerpted from the
annual report of A.P. Møller - Maersk (DNK).
A.P. Møller - Maersk
Note 26. Subsequent Events
On 21 February 2019, the Board of Directors has decided to initiate the separation of the
drilling activities through a demerger. The shares in Maersk Drilling Holding A/S (Maersk
Drilling) and its subsidiaries as well as certain other assets and liabilities will be contributed
to a new company with the legal name “The Drilling Company of 1972 A/S”. The Board of
Directors intends to propose the demerger for approval by the shareholders of A.P. Møller -
Mærsk A/S at the Annual General Meeting on 2 April 2019.
Subject to approval at the Annual General Meeting, the shares in Maersk Drilling will be
distributed to A.P. Møller - Maersk shareholders with anticipated first day of trading on 4
April 2019. The A.P. Møller - Maersk Board of Directors intends to propose a single share
class structure for Maersk Drilling with the new listed shares being distributed on a pro-rata
basis based on the nominal value of the shares in A.P. Møller - Mærsk A/S. Shareholders
will receive one share in Maersk Drilling per nominal A.P. Møller - Maersk DKK 500 share
and two shares in Maersk Drilling per nominal A.P. Møller - Maersk DKK 1,000 share.
ILLUSTRATION 24.5 Disclosure of Subsequent Events
Many subsequent events or developments do not require adjustment of or disclosure in the
financial statements. Typically, these are non-accounting events or conditions that
management normally communicates by other means. These events include legislation,

--- Page 2209 ---
product changes, management changes, strikes, unionization, marketing agreements, and
loss of important customers.
Reporting for Diversified (Conglomerate) Companies
In certain business climates, companies have a tendency to diversify their operations. Take
the case of Siemens AG (DEU), whose products include energy technologies, consumer
products, and financial services. When businesses are so diversified, investors and
investment analysts want more information about the details behind conglomerate financial
statements. Particularly, they want income statement, statement of financial position, and
cash flow information on the individual segments that compose the total income figure.
Much information is hidden in the aggregated totals. With only the consolidated figures, the
analyst cannot tell the extent to which the differing product lines contribute to the
company’s profitability, risk, and growth potential. For example, in Illustration
24.6, the office equipment segment looks like a risky venture. Segmented reporting would
provide useful information about the two business segments and would be helpful in making
an informed investment decision regarding the whole company.
Office Equipment and Auto Parts Company
Income Statement Data
(in millions)
Consolidated
Office
Equipment
Auto
Parts
Net sales
$78.8
$18.0 $60.8
Manufacturing costs
Inventories, beginning
12.3
4.0
8.3
Materials and services
38.9
10.8
28.1
Wages
12.9
3.8
9.1
Inventories, ending
(13.3)
(3.9)
(9.4)
50.8
14.7
36.1
Selling and administrative expenses
12.1
1.6
10.5
Total operating expenses
62.9
16.3
46.6
Income before taxes
15.9
1.7
14.2
Income taxes
(9.3)
(1.0) (8.3)
Net income
$ 6.6
$ 0.7 $ 5.9
ILLUSTRATION 24.6 Segmented Income Statement
A classic situation that demonstrates the need for segmented data involved Caterpillar,
Inc. (USA). Market regulators cited Caterpillar because it failed to tell investors that nearly a
quarter of its income in one year came from a Brazilian unit and was non-recurring in
nature. The company knew that different economic policies in the next year would probably
greatly affect earnings of the Brazilian unit. But Caterpillar presented its financial results on
a consolidated basis, not disclosing the Brazilian operations. Caterpillar’s failure to include
information about Brazil left investors with an incomplete picture of the company’s financial

--- Page 2210 ---
results and denied investors the opportunity to see the company “through the eyes of
management.”
Companies have always been somewhat hesitant to disclose segmented data for various
reasons:
1. Without a thorough knowledge of the business and an understanding of such important
factors as the competitive environment and capital investment requirements, the
investor may find the segmented information meaningless or may even draw improper
conclusions about the reported earnings of the segments.
2. Additional disclosure may be helpful to competitors, labor unions, suppliers, and certain
government regulatory agencies, and thus harm the reporting company.
3. Additional disclosure may discourage management from taking intelligent business
risks because segments reporting losses or unsatisfactory earnings may cause
shareholder dissatisfaction with management.
4. The wide variation among companies in the choice of segments, cost allocation, and
other accounting problems limits the usefulness of segmented information.
5. The investor is investing in the company as a whole and not in the particular segments,
and it should not matter how any single segment is performing if the overall
performance is satisfactory.
6. Certain technical problems, such as classification of segments and allocation of segment
revenues and costs (especially “common costs”), are formidable.
On the other hand, the advocates of segmented disclosures offer these reasons in support of
the practice:
1. Investors need segmented information to make an intelligent investment decision
regarding a diversified company.
a. Sales and earnings of individual segments enable investors to evaluate the
differences between segments in growth rate, risk, and profitability, and to forecast
consolidated profits.
b. Segmented reports help investors evaluate the company’s investment worth by
disclosing the nature of a company’s businesses and the relative size of the
components.
2. The absence of segmented reporting by a diversified company may put its unsegmented,
single product-line competitors at a competitive disadvantage because the conglomerate
may obscure information that its competitors must disclose.
The advocates of segmented disclosures appear to have a much stronger case. Many users
indicate that segmented data are the most useful financial information provided, aside from
the basic financial statements. As a result, the IASB has issued extensive reporting guidelines
in this area.
Objective of Reporting Segmented Information
The objective of reporting segmented financial data is to provide information about the
different types of business activities in which an enterprise engages and the different

--- Page 2211 ---
economic environments in which it operates. Meeting this objective will help users of
financial statements do the following.
a. Better understand the enterprise’s performance.
b. Better assess its prospects for future net cash flows.
c. Make more informed judgments about the enterprise as a whole.
Basic Principles
Financial statements can be disaggregated in several ways. For example, they can be
disaggregated by products or services, by geography, by legal entity, or by type of customer.
However, it is not feasible to provide all of that information in every set of financial
statements. IFRS requires that general-purpose financial statements include selected
information on a single basis of segmentation. Thus, a company can meet the segmented
reporting objective by providing financial statements segmented based on how the
company’s operations are managed. The method chosen is referred to as the management
approach. [8] The management approach reflects how management segments
the company for making operating decisions. The segments are evident from the
components of the company’s organization structure. These components are called
operating segments.
Identifying Operating Segments
An operating segment is a component of an enterprise:
a. That engages in business activities from which it earns revenues and incurs expenses.
b. Whose operating results are regularly reviewed by the company’s chief operating
decision- maker to assess segment performance and allocate resources to the segment.
c. For which discrete financial information is available that is generated by or based on the
internal financial reporting system.
Companies may aggregate information about two or more operating segments only if the
segments have the same basic characteristics in each of the following areas.
a. The nature of the products and services provided.
b. The nature of the production process.
c. The type or class of customer.
d. The methods of product or service distribution.
e. If applicable, the nature of the regulatory environment.
After the company decides on the possible segments for disclosure, it makes a quantitative
materiality test. This test determines whether the segment is significant enough to warrant
actual disclosure. An operating segment is deemed significant and therefore a reportable
segment if it satisfies one or more of the following quantitative thresholds.
1. Its revenue (including sales to both internal and external customers and intersegment
sales or transfers) is 10 percent or more of the combined revenue of all the company’s

--- Page 2212 ---
operating segments.
2. The absolute amount of its profit or loss is 10 percent or more of the greater, in
absolute amount, of (a) the combined operating profit of all operating segments that did
not incur a loss, or (b) the combined loss of all operating segments that did report a
loss.
3. Its identifiable assets are 10 percent or more of the combined assets of all operating
segments.
In applying these tests, the company must consider two additional factors. First, segment
data must explain a significant portion of the company’s business. Specifically, the
segmented results must equal or exceed 75 percent of the combined sales to unaffiliated
customers for the entire company. This test prevents a company from providing limited
information on only a few segments and lumping all the rest into one category.
Second, the profession recognizes that reporting too many segments may overwhelm users
with detailed information. The IASB decided that 10 is a reasonable upper limit for the
number of segments that a company must disclose (see Underlying Concepts). [9]
Underlying Concepts
Users of financial statements indicate that multi-segment companies operate diverse
businesses that are subject to different opportunities and risks. Segment information
provides additional insight about the opportunities and risks of investments and
sharpens predictions. Because of its predictive value, providing segment information is
of the highest priority.
To illustrate these requirements, assume a company has identified six possible reporting
segments, as shown in Illustration 24.7 (euros in thousands).
Segments
Total Revenue
(Unaffiliated)
Operating
Profit (Loss)
Identifiable
Assets
A
€ 100
€10
€ 60
B
50
2
30
C
700
40
390
D
300
20
160
E
900
18
280
F
100
(5)
50
€2,150
€85
€970
ILLUSTRATION 24.7 Data for Different Possible Reporting Segments
The company would apply the respective tests as follows.
Revenue test: .10 × €2,150 = €215; C, D, and E meet this test.
Operating profit (loss) test: .10 × €90 = €9 (note that the €5 loss is ignored, because
the test is based on non-loss segments); A, C, D, and E meet this test.
Identifiable assets tests: .10 × €970 = €97; C, D, and E meet this test.

--- Page 2213 ---
The reporting segments are therefore A, C, D, and E, assuming that these four segments have
enough sales to meet the 75 percent of combined sales test. The 75 percent test is computed
as follows.
75% of combined sales test: .75 × €2,150 = €1,612.50. The sales of A, C, D, and E total
€2,000 (€100 + €700 + €300 + €900); therefore, the 75 percent test is met.
Measurement Principles
The accounting principles that companies use for segment disclosure need not be the same
as the principles they use to prepare the consolidated statements. This flexibility may at first
appear inconsistent. But, preparing segment information in accordance with IFRS would be
difficult because some IFRS are not expected to be applied at a segment level. Examples
include accounting for the cost of company-wide employee benefit plans, and accounting for
income taxes in a company that files a consolidated tax return with segments in different tax
jurisdictions.
The IASB does not require allocations of joint, common, or company-wide costs solely for
external reporting purposes. Common costs are those incurred for the benefit of more than
one segment and whose interrelated nature prevents a completely objective division of costs
among segments. For example, the company president’s salary is difficult to allocate to
various segments. Allocations of common costs are inherently arbitrary and may not be
meaningful. There is a presumption that if companies allocate common costs to segments,
these allocations are either directly attributable or reasonably allocable to the segments.
Segmented Information Reported
The IASB requires that an enterprise report the following.
1. General information about its operating segments. This includes factors that
management considers most significant in determining the company’s operating
segments and the types of products and services from which each operating segment
derives its revenues.
2. Segment profit and loss and related information. Specifically, companies must
report the following information about each operating segment if the amounts are
included in determining segment profit or loss.
a. Revenues from transactions with external customers.
b. Revenues from transactions with other operating segments of the same enterprise.
c. Interest revenue.
d. Interest expense.
e. Depreciation and amortization expense.
f. Unusual items.
g. Equity in the net income of investees accounted for by the equity method.
h. Income tax expense or benefit.
i. Significant non-cash items other than depreciation, depletion, and amortization
expense.

--- Page 2214 ---
3. Segment assets and liabilities. A company must report each operating segment’s
total assets and liabilities.
4. Reconciliations. A company must provide a reconciliation of the total of the
segments’ revenues to total revenues, a reconciliation of the total of the operating
segments’ profits and losses to its income before income taxes, and a reconciliation of
the total of the operating segments’ assets and liabilities to total assets and liabilities.
5. Information about products and services and geographic areas. For each
operating segment not based on geography, the company must report (unless it is
impracticable): (1) revenues from external customers, (2) long-lived assets, and (3)
expenditures during the period for long-lived assets. This information, if material, must
be reported (a) in the enterprise’s country of domicile and (b) in each other country.
6. Major customers. If 10 percent or more of company revenue is derived from a single
customer, the company must disclose the total amount of revenue from each such
customer by segment.
Illustration of Disaggregated Information
Illustration 24.8 shows the segment disclosure for Equinor (NOR).

--- Page 2215 ---
Equinor
3 Segments (partial)
Segment data for the year ended 31 December, 2018 is presented below. The measurement
basis of segment profit is Net operating income. In the table below, deferred tax assets,
pension assets and non-current financial assets are not allocated to the segments. Also, the
line additions to PP&E, intangibles, and equity accounted investments is excluding
movements due to changes in asset retirement obligations.
(in USD million)
E&P
Norway
E&P 
International
MMP
Other Eliminations
Total
Full year 2018
Revenues third party,
other revenues and
other income
588
3,182
75,487
44
0
79,301
Revenues inter-
segment
21,877
9,186
291
2
(31,355)
0
Net income/(loss)
from equity accounted
investments
10
31
16
234
0
291
Total revenues and
other income
22,475
12,399
75,794
280
(31,355)
79,593
Purchases (net of
inventory variation)
2
(26) (69,296)
(0)
30,805 (38,515)
Operating, selling,
general and
administrative
expenses
(3,270)
(3,006)
(4,377)
(288)
653 (10,288)
Depreciation,
amortisation and net
impairment losses
(4,370)
(4,592)
(215)
(72)
0
(9,249)
Exploration expenses
(431)
(973)
0
0
0
(1,404)
Net operating
income/(loss)
14,406
3,802
1,906
(79)
103
20,137
Additions to PP&E,
intangibles and equity
accounted
investments
6,947
7,403
331
519
0
15,201
Balance sheet
information

--- Page 2216 ---
Equity accounted
investments
1,102
296
92
1,373
0
2,863
Non-current segment
assets
30,762
38,672
5,148
353
0
74,934
Non-current assets,
not allocated to
segments
8,655
Total non-current
assets
86,452
ILLUSTRATION 24.8 Segment Disclosure
Interim Reports
Another source of information for the investor is interim reports. As noted earlier, interim
reports cover periods of less than one year. The securities exchanges, market regulators,
and the accounting profession have an active interest in the presentation of interim
information (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
For information to be relevant, it must be available to decision-makers before it loses its
capacity to influence their decisions (timeliness). Interim reporting is an excellent
example of this concept.
Because of the short-term nature of the information in these reports, there is considerable
controversy which general approach companies should employ. One group, which favors the
discrete approach, believes that companies should treat each interim period as a separate
accounting period. Under that protocol, companies would follow the principles for deferrals
and accruals used for annual reports. Companies would report accounting transactions as
they occur, and expense recognition would not change with the period of time covered.
Another group, which favors the integral approach, believes that the interim report is an
integral part of the annual report and that deferrals and accruals should take into
consideration what will happen for the entire year. In this approach, companies would assign
estimated expenses to parts of a year on the basis of sales volume or some other activity
base. In general, IFRS requires companies to follow the discrete approach. [10]
Interim Reporting Requirements
Generally, companies should use the same accounting policies for both interim
and annual reports. They should recognize revenues in interim periods on the same basis
as they are recognized for annual periods. For example, if Cedars Corp. uses the percentage-
of-completion method as the basis for recognizing revenue on an annual basis, then it should
use the percentage-of-completion method for interim reports as well. Also, Cedars should
treat costs directly associated with revenues (product costs, such as materials, labor and
related fringe benefits and manufacturing overhead) in the same manner for interim reports
as for annual reports.

--- Page 2217 ---
Companies should use the same inventory pricing methods (FIFO, average-cost, etc.) for
both interim and annual reports. However, companies may use the gross profit method for
interim inventory pricing. But they must disclose the method and adjustments to reconcile
with annual inventory.
Discrete Approach
Following the discrete approach, companies record in interim reports revenues and expenses
according to the revenue and expense recognition principles. This includes costs and
expenses other than product costs (often referred to as period costs). No accruals or deferrals
in anticipation of future events during the year should be reported. For example, the cost of a
planned major periodic maintenance or overhaul for a company such as Airbus (FRA), or
other seasonal expenditure that is expected to occur late in the year is not anticipated for
interim reporting purposes. The mere intention or necessity of incurring future expenditures
is not sufficient to give rise to an obligation.
A company such as Carrefour (FRA) may budget certain costs, which it expects to be
incurred sporadically during the financial year, such as advertising and employee training
costs. Those costs generally are discretionary even though they are planned and tend to recur
from year to year. However, recognizing an obligation at the end of an interim financial
reporting period for costs that have not yet been incurred is not consistent generally with the
definition of a liability.
While year-to-date measurements may involve changes in estimates of amounts reported in
prior interim periods of the current financial year, the principles for recognizing assets,
liabilities, income, and expenses for interim periods are the same as in annual financial
statements. For example, Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc (GBR) records losses from
inventory write-downs, restructurings, or impairments in an interim period similarly to how
it treats these items in the annual financial statements (when incurred). However, if an
estimate from a prior interim period changes in a subsequent interim period of that year, the
original estimate is adjusted in the subsequent interim period.
Interim Disclosures
IFRS does not require a complete set of financial statements at the interim reporting date.
Rather, companies can comply with the requirements by providing condensed financial
statements and selected explanatory notes. Because users of interim financial reports also
have access to the most recent annual financial report, companies only have to provide
explanation of significant events and transactions since the end of the last annual reporting
period. Companies should report the following interim data at a minimum.
1. Statement that the same accounting policies and methods of computation are followed
in the interim financial statements as compared with the most recent annual financial
statements or, if those policies or methods have been changed, a description of the
nature and effect of the change.
2. Explanatory comments about the seasonality or cyclicality of interim operations.
3. The nature and amount of items affecting assets, liabilities, equity, net income, or cash
flows that are unusual because of their nature, size, or incidence.

--- Page 2218 ---
4. The nature and amount of changes in accounting policies and estimates of amounts
previously reported.
5. Issuances, repurchases, and repayments of debt and equity securities.
6. Dividends paid (aggregate or per share) separately for ordinary shares and other shares.
7. Segment information, as required by IFRS 8, “Operating Segments.”
8. Changes in contingent liabilities or contingent assets since the end of the last annual
reporting period.
9. Effect of changes in the composition of the company during the interim period, such as
business combinations, obtaining or losing control of subsidiaries and long-term
investments, restructurings, and discontinued operations.
10. Other material events subsequent to the end of the interim period that have not been
reflected in the financial statements for the interim period.
If a complete set of financial statements is provided in the interim report, companies comply
with the provisions of IAS 1, “Presentation of Financial Statements.”
Unique Problems of Interim Reporting
IFRS reflects a preference for the discrete approach. However, within this broad guideline, a
number of unique reporting problems develop related to the following items.
Income Taxes
Not every dollar of company taxable income may be taxed at the same rate if the tax rate is
progressive. This aspect of business income taxes poses a problem in preparing interim
financial statements. Should the company use the annualized approach, which
annualizes income to date and accrues the proportionate income tax for the period to date?
Or should it follow the marginal principle approach, which applies the lower rate of tax
to the first amount of income earned? At one time, companies generally followed the latter
approach and accrued the tax applicable to each additional dollar of income.
IFRS requires use of the annualized approach. Income tax expense is recognized in
each interim period based on the best estimate of the weighted-average annual income tax
rate expected for the full financial year. This approach is consistent with applying the same
principles in interim reports that are applied to the annual report; that is, income taxes are
assessed on an annual basis. However, amounts accrued for income tax expense in one
interim period may have to be adjusted in a subsequent interim period of that financial year
if the estimate of the annual income tax rate changes. [11]7
Seasonality
Seasonality occurs when most of a company’s sales occur in one short period of the year,
while certain costs are fairly evenly spread throughout the year. For example, the natural gas
industry has its greatest sales in the winter months. In contrast, the beverage industry has its
greatest sales in the summer months.

--- Page 2219 ---
The problem of seasonality is related to the expense recognition principle in accounting.
Generally, expenses are associated with the revenues they create. In a seasonal business,
wide fluctuations in profits occur because off-season sales do not absorb the company’s fixed
costs (for example, manufacturing, selling, and administrative costs that tend to remain
fairly constant regardless of sales or production).
To illustrate why seasonality is a problem, assume the information as shown in Illustration
24.9.
Selling price per unit
$1
Annual sales for the period (projected and actual) 100,000
units @ $1
$100,000
Manufacturing costs
Variable
10¢ per unit
Fixed
20¢ per unit or $20,000 for
the year
Non-manufacturing costs
Variable
10¢ per unit
Fixed
30¢ per unit or $30,000 for
the year
ILLUSTRATION 24.9 Data for Seasonality Example
Illustration 24.10 shows sales for four quarters and the year (projected and actual).
Percent of Sales
1st Quarter
$ 20,000
20%
2nd Quarter
5,000
5
3rd Quarter
10,000
10
4th Quarter
65,000
65
Total for the year $100,000
100%
ILLUSTRATION 24.10 Sales Data for Seasonality Example
Under the present accounting framework, the income statements for the quarters might be
as shown in Illustration 24.11.

--- Page 2220 ---
1st Qtr
2nd Qtr
3rd Qtr
4th Qtr
Year
Sales
$20,000
$ 5,000
$10,000
$65,000
$100,000
Manufacturing costs
Variable
(2,000)
(500)
(1,000)
(6,500)
(10,000)
Fixeda
(4,000)
(1,000)
(2,000)
(13,000)
(20,000)
14,000
3,500
7,000
45,500
70,000
Non-manufacturing costs
Variable
(2,000)
(500)
(1,000)
(6,500)
(10,000)
Fixedb
(7,500)
(7,500)
(7,500)
(7,500)
(30,000)
Income
$ 4,500
$(4,500)
$ (1,500)
$31,500
$ 30,000
a The fixed manufacturing costs are inventoried, so that equal amounts of fixed costs do not appear during each quarter.
b The fixed non-manufacturing costs are not inventoried, so equal amounts of fixed costs appear during each quarter.
ILLUSTRATION 24.11 Interim Net Income for Seasonal Business—Discrete
Approach
An investor who uses the first quarter’s results might be misled. If the first quarter’s
earnings are $4,500, should this figure be multiplied by four to predict annual earnings of
$18,000? Or, if first-quarter sales of $20,000 are 20 percent of the predicted sales for the
year, would the net income for the year be $22,500 ($4,500 × 5)? Both figures are obviously
wrong. And the investor may become even more confused after the second quarter’s results
are reported.
The problem with the conventional approach is that the fixed non-manufacturing costs are
not charged in proportion to sales. Some enterprises have avoided this problem by making all
fixed non-manufacturing costs follow the sales pattern, as shown in Illustration 24.12.
1st Qtr 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr
4th Qtr
Year
Sales
$20,000 $ 5,000 $10,000 $65,000 $100,000
Manufacturing costs
Variable
(2,000)
(500) (1,000)
(6,500) (10,000)
Fixed
(4,000) (1,000) (2,000) (13,000) (20,000)
14,000
3,500
7,000
45,500
70,000
Non-manufacturing costs
Variable
(2,000)
(500) (1,000)
(6,500) (10,000)
Fixed
(6,000) (1,500) (3,000) (19,500) (30,000)
Income
$ 6,000 $ 1,500 $ 3,000 $19,500 $ 30,000
ILLUSTRATION 24.12 Interim Net Income for Seasonal Business—Integral
Approach
This approach solves some of the problems of interim reporting: Sales in the first quarter are
20 percent of total sales for the year, and net income in the first quarter is 20 percent of total
income. In this case, as in the previous example, the investor cannot rely on multiplying any

--- Page 2221 ---
given quarter by four but can use comparative data or can rely on some estimate of sales in
relation to income for a given period.
The greater the degree of seasonality a company experiences, the greater the possibility of
distortion. Because there are no definitive guidelines for handling such items as the fixed
non-manufacturing costs, variability in income can be substantial. To alleviate this problem,
IFRS requires companies subject to material seasonal variations to both disclose the
seasonal nature of their business and consider supplementing their interim reports with
information for 12-month periods ended at the interim date, for the current and preceding
years.
The two illustrations highlight the difference between the discrete and integral
approaches. Illustration 24.11 represents the discrete approach, in which the fixed non-
manufacturing expenses are expensed as incurred. Illustration 24.12 shows the integral
approach, in which expenses are charged to expense on the basis of some measure of activity.

--- Page 2222 ---
Evolving Issue
It’s Faster But Is It Better?
The profession has developed some rules for interim reporting, but much still has to be
done. As yet, it is unclear whether the discrete or the integral method, or some
combination of the two, will prevail. Discussion also persists about the independent
auditor’s involvement in interim reports. Many auditors are reluctant to express an
opinion on interim financial information, arguing that the data are too tentative and
subjective. On the other hand, more people are advocating some examination of interim
reports. As a compromise, auditors generally perform a review of interim financial
information. Such a review, which is much more limited in its procedures than the
annual audit, provides some assurance that the interim information appears to be in
accord with relevant standards.8
Analysts and investors want financial information as soon as possible, before it’s old
news. We may not be far from a continuous database system in which company
financial records can be accessed via the Internet. Investors might be able to access a
company’s financial records whenever they wish and put the information in the format
they need. Thus, they could learn about sales slippage, cost increases, or earnings
changes as they happen, rather than waiting until after the quarter has ended. A step in
this direction is the mandate by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for
companies to file their financial statements electronically.
The SEC also believes that timeliness of information is extremely important. It gives
large public companies just 45 days to complete and disseminate their annual reports.
Quarterly reports must be done within 40 days of the close of the quarter, and company
executives and shareholders with more than 10 percent of a company’s outstanding
shares now have just two days to disclose their sale or purchase of shares. Furthermore,
the SEC encourages companies to post current, quarterly, and annual reports on their
websites—or explain why they don’t. The postings would have to be made by the day the
company submits the information to the U.S. SEC. A steady stream of information from
the company to the investor could be very positive because it might alleviate
management’s continual concern with short-run interim numbers.
In a recent speech, Hans Hoogervorst, chair of the IASB, made the following comments
about the relationship between short-termism and accounting standards:

--- Page 2223 ---
“I agree with everybody who thinks that the financial markets are plagued by short-
termism.
Management can be subject to the temptations of short-termism. Although
executive pay is often linked to a company’s financial performance, all too often this
performance is measured using unbalanced non-GAAP numbers, defined by
management itself. Moreover, because the median tenure for CEOs is no longer
than five years, management can be tempted to boost a company’s short-term
performance at the expense of long-term results.
Given these incentives for short-termism, high-quality accounting standards are
essential. Accounting standards that aim to reflect economic reality as closely as
possible help the company and its investors to navigate challenges in a timely
fashion.”
While some are calling for the elimination of all interim reporting requirements in
response to the negative consequences of short-termism, others are calling for a
common sense approach, encouraging standard-setters to consider both costs and
benets. In their view, regulators and standard-setters should be judicious when
establishing disclosures that are mandatory every reporting period, and that the hurdle
should be high for such requirements.
Sources: D. Benoit, “Time to End Quarterly Reports, Law Firm Says,” Wall Street Journal (August 19, 2015);
PricewaterhouseCoopers, “The Interim Reporting Model: Time to Get Back to Basics,” Point of View (November
2014); and Hans Hoogervorst, “Accounting Standards and the Long Term,” Speech at the 9th Symposium of
Accounting Research at Autorité des Normes Comptables (December 19, 2019).
Auditor’s and Management’s Reports
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Identify the major disclosures in the auditor’s report and management’s responsibilities
for the financial statements.
Auditor’s Report
Another important source of information often overlooked is the auditor’s report. An
auditor is an accounting professional who conducts an independent examination of a
company’s accounting data.
Audit Opinion
If satisfied that the financial statements present the financial position, results of operations,
and cash flows fairly in accordance with IFRS, the auditor expresses an unmodified
opinion. An example is shown in Illustration 24.13.9

--- Page 2224 ---
Puma SE
Auditor’s Report (in part)
Audit Opinions
We have audited the consolidated financial statements of PUMA SE, Herzogenaurach, and
its subsidiaries (the Group), which comprise the consolidated balance sheet as at 31
December 2018, the consolidated income statement, the consolidated statement of
comprehensive income, the consolidated statement of changes in equity and the
consolidated cash flow statement for the financial year from 1 January to 31 December 2018
as well as the notes to the consolidated financial statements, including a summary of
significant accounting policies. In addition, we have audited the combined management
report of PUMA SE for the financial year from 1 January to 31 December 2018.
In our opinion, on the basis of the knowledge obtained in the audit…
the accompanying consolidated financial statements comply, in all material respects,
with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted by the EU, and
the additional requirements of German commercial law pursuant to Section 315e (1)
German Commercial Code (HGB) and, in compliance with these requirements, give a
true and fair view of the assets, liabilities, and financial position of the Group as at 31
December 2018, and of its financial performance for the financial year from 1 January
to 31 December 2018, and
the accompanying combined management report as a whole provides an appropriate
view of the Group’s position. In all material respects, this combined management
report is consistent with the consolidated financial statements, complies with German
legal requirements and appropriately presents the opportunities and risks of future
development. Our audit opinion on the combined management report does not cover
the content of the statement on corporate governance and the corporate governance
report specified in Chapter “Corporate Governance Report including the Statement on
Corporate Governance pursuant to § 289f and § 315d HGB” of the combined
management report.
Pursuant to Section 322 (3) Sentence 1 German Commercial Code (HGB), we declare that
our audit has not led to any reservations relating to the legal compliance of the consolidated
financial statements and of the combined management report.
Basis for the Audit Opinions
We conducted our audit of the consolidated financial statements and of the combined
management report in accordance with Section 317 German Commercial Code (HGB) and
the EU Audit Regulation (No. 537 / 2014; referred to subsequently as “EU Audit
Regulation”) and in compliance with German Generally Accepted Standards for Financial
Statement Audits promulgated by the Institut der Wirtschaftsprüfer (IDW). Our
responsibilities under those requirements and principles are further described in the
“Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated Financial Statements and of

--- Page 2225 ---
the Combined Management Report” section of our auditor’s report. We are independent of
the group entities in accordance with the requirements of European law and German
commercial and professional law, and we have fulfilled our other German professional
responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. In addition, in accordance with
Article 10 (2) Point (f) of the EU Audit Regulation, we declare that we have not provided
non-audit services prohibited under Article 5 (1) of the EU Audit Regulation. We believe
that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for
our audit opinions on the consolidated financial statements and on the combined
management report.
Auditor’s Responsibilities for the Audit of the Consolidated Financial
Statements and of the Combined Management Report
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial
statements as a whole are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error,
and whether the combined management report as a whole provides an appropriate view of
the Group’s position and, in all material respects, is consistent with the consolidated
financial statements and the knowledge obtained in the audit, complies with the German
legal requirements and appropriately presents the opportunities and risks of future
development, as well as to issue an auditor’s report that includes our audit opinions on the
consolidated financial statements and on the combined management report.
Reasonable assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit
conducted in accordance with Section 317 German Commercial Code (HGB) and the EU
Audit Regulation and in compliance with German Generally Accepted Standards for
Financial Statement Audits promulgated by the Institut der Wirtschaftsprüfer (IDW) will
always detect a material misstatement. Misstatements can arise from fraud or error and are
considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial
statements and this combined management report.
OTHER LEGAL AND REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
Further information pursuant to Article 10 of the EU Audit Regulation
We were elected as group auditor by the annual general meeting on 12 April 2018. We were
engaged by the Supervisory Board on 24 October 2018. We have been the group auditor of
PUMA SE, Herzogenaurach, without interruption since the financial year 2012.
We declare that the audit opinions expressed in this auditor’s report are consistent with the
additional report to the audit committee pursuant to Article 11 of the EU Audit Regulation
(long form audit report).
GERMAN PUBLIC AUDITOR RESPONSIBLE FOR THE ENGAGEMENT
The German Public Auditor responsible for the engagement is Stefan Otto.
Munich, 30 January 2019
Deloitte GmbH 
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft
Christof Stadter 
Wirtschaftsprüfer
[German Public Auditor]

--- Page 2226 ---
Stefan Otto
Wirtschaftsprüfer
[German Public Auditor]
Source: The full 2018 auditor’s report for Puma can be accessed at the company’s website; see pages 197-201.
ILLUSTRATION 24.13 Auditor’s Report
In preparing the report, the auditor followed these reporting standards.
1. The report states whether the financial statements are in accordance with the financial
reporting framework (IFRS) and describes the responsibilities of the directors and
auditors with respect to the financial statements.
2. The report identifies those circumstances in which the company has not consistently
observed such policies in the current period in relation to the preceding period.
3. Users are to regard the informative disclosures in the financial statements as reasonably
adequate unless the report states otherwise.
4. The report contains either an expression of opinion regarding the financial statements
taken as a whole or an assertion to the effect that an opinion cannot be expressed. When
the auditor cannot express an overall opinion, the report should state the reasons. In all
cases where an auditor’s name is associated with financial statements, the report should
contain a clear-cut indication of the character of the auditor’s examination, if any, and
the degree of responsibility being taken.
In most cases, the auditor issues a standard unmodified or clean opinion, as shown in
Illustration 24.13. That is, the auditor expresses the opinion that the financial statements
present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position, results of operations, and cash
flows of the entity in conformity with accepted accounting principles.
Certain circumstances, although they do not affect the auditor’s unmodified opinion, may
require the auditor to add an explanatory paragraph to the audit report. Some of the more
important circumstances are as follows.
1. Going concern. The auditor must evaluate whether there is substantial doubt about
the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time,
taking into consideration all available information about the future. (Generally, the
future is at least, but not limited to, 12 months from the end of the reporting period.) If
substantial doubt exists about the company’s future, the auditor adds to the report an
explanatory note describing the potential problem.
2. Lack of consistency. If a company has changed accounting policies or the method of
their application in a way that has a material effect on the comparability of its financial
statements, the auditor should refer to the change in an explanatory paragraph of the
report. Such an explanatory paragraph should identify the nature of the change and refer
readers to the note in the financial statements that discusses the change in detail. The
auditor’s concurrence with a change is implicit unless the auditor takes exception to the
change in expressing an opinion as to fair presentation in conformity with accepted
accounting principles (IFRS).
3. Emphasis of a matter. The auditor may wish to emphasize a matter regarding the
financial statements but nevertheless intends to express an unqualified opinion. For

--- Page 2227 ---
example, the auditor may wish to emphasize that the entity is a component of a larger
business enterprise or that it has had significant transactions with related parties. The
auditor presents such explanatory information in a separate paragraph of the report.
In some situations, however, the auditor expresses a modified opinion. A modified
opinion can be either (1) a qualified opinion, (2) an adverse opinion, or (3) a disclaimed
opinion.
A qualified opinion contains an exception to the standard opinion. Ordinarily, the
exception is not of sufficient magnitude to invalidate the statements as a whole; if it were, an
adverse opinion would be rendered. The circumstances in which the auditor may deviate
from the standard unqualified report on financial statements are as follows.
1. The scope of the examination is limited or affected by conditions or restrictions.
2. The statements do not fairly present financial position or results of operations because
of:
a. Lack of conformity with accepted accounting principles and standards.
b. Inadequate disclosure.
If confronted with one of the situations noted above, the auditor must offer a qualified
opinion. A qualified opinion states that, except for the effects of the matter to which the
qualification relates, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position, results of operations, and cash flows in conformity with accepted
accounting principles.
Illustration 24.14 shows an example of an auditor’s report with a modified opinion—in
this case, a qualified opinion of Helio Company (USA). The auditor modified the opinion
because the company used an accounting policy at variance with accepted accounting
principles.

--- Page 2228 ---
Helio Company
Independent Auditor’s Report
(Same first and second paragraphs as the standard report)
Helio Company has excluded, from property and debt in the accompanying balance sheets,
certain lease obligations that, in our opinion, should be capitalized in order to conform with
accepted accounting principles. If these lease obligations were capitalized, property would
be increased by $1,500,000 and $1,300,000, long-term debt by $1,400,000 and $1,200,000,
and retained earnings by $100,000 and $50,000 as of December 31, in the current and prior
year, respectively. Additionally, net income would be decreased by $40,000 and $30,000
and earnings per share would be decreased by $.06 and $.04, respectively, for the years then
ended.
In our opinion, except for the effects of not capitalizing certain lease obligations as
discussed in the preceding paragraph, the financial statements referred to above present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of Helio Company, and the results of its
operations and its cash flows for the years then ended in conformity with accepted
accounting principles.
ILLUSTRATION 24.14 Auditor’s Report with Qualified Opinion
An adverse opinion is required in any report in which the exceptions to fair presentation
are so material that in the independent auditor’s judgment, a qualified opinion is not
justified. In such a case, the financial statements taken as a whole are not presented in
accordance with IFRS. Adverse opinions are rare because most companies change their
accounting to conform with IFRS. Market regulators will not permit a company listed on an
exchange to have an adverse opinion.
A disclaimer of an opinion is appropriate when the auditor has gathered so little
information on the financial statements that no opinion can be expressed.
Key Audit Matters
In many countries, auditors are also required to include in their audit report “key audit
matters.” Key audit matters (KAMs) are defined as “those matters that, in the auditor’s
professional judgement, were of the most significance in the audit of the financial statement
of the current period.”10 Illustration 24.15 presents a KAM discussion from the audit
report of Puma (DEU).

--- Page 2229 ---
Puma SE
Key Audit Matter Discussion (in part)
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most
significance in our audit of the consolidated financial statements for the financial year from
1 January to 31 December 2018. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of
the consolidated financial statements as a whole and in forming our audit opinion thereon;
we do not provide a separate audit opinion on these matters.
In the following we present the key audit matters we have determined in the course of our
audit:
1. Recoverability of goodwill
2. Recoverability of the Cobra brand
Our presentation of these key audit matters has been structured as follows:
a. Description (including reference to corresponding information in the consolidated
financial statements)
b. Auditor’s response
Recoverability of goodwill
a. The consolidated financial statements of PUMA SE show goodwill in the amount of
mEUR 245.7 corresponding to approximately 7.7% of the consolidated balance sheet total or
14.3% of the group equity.
Each financial year or in case of respective signs of impairment, goodwill is subject to
impairment tests. The impairment tests are performed by PUMA SE by applying the
“discounted cash flow method”. The valuation is based on the present values of the future
cash flows. The company’s valuation model is based on future cash flows, which are in turn
based on the effective three-year plan and valid at the date the impairment test. This
detailed planning phase is extended with the assumption of long-term growth rates. The
discounting is performed using the weighted average cost of capital (WACC). Here, the
realizable amount is determined on the basis of the value in use and a possible need for
impairment is determined by comparing the value in use with the carrying amount.
The outcome of this valuation highly depends on the legal representatives’ assessment of
future cash flows, the WACC rate applied and the long-term growth rate and therefore
involves uncertainties and discretion. Thus, the assessment of the recoverability of the
goodwill was classified as a key audit matter within the scope of our audit.
Information on the goodwill, provided by the legal representatives, is disclosed in Chapter 2
“Significant Consolidation, Accounting and Valuation Principles” and in Chapter 10
“Intangible Assets” of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.

--- Page 2230 ---
b. Within the scope of our risk-oriented audit, we gained an understanding of the systematic
approach applied when performing the impairment test. We satisfied ourselves, that the
valuation model used adequately presents the requirements of the relevant standards,
whether the necessary input data are completely and accurately determined and whether
the calculations within the model are performed correctly. We satisfied ourselves of the
appropriateness of the future cash flows used for the computation by reconciling these cash
flows particularly with the effective three-year plan as well as by interviewing the legal
representatives or persons appointed by them with regard to the material assumptions
underlying this plan. In addition, we performed a critical assessment of the plan under
consideration of general and industry-specific market expectations.
Since a material portion of the value in use results from the forecasted cash flows for the
period after the three-year plan (phase of perpetuity), we in particular critically assessed the
sustainable growth rate used within the perpetuity phase by means of general and industry-
specific market expectations. Since relatively low changes of the discounting rate may
materially affect the amount of the realizable value, we have also checked the parameters
used when determining the WACC rate involving internal valuation experts from the
financial advisory sector and reproduced the computation scheme.
Due to the material significance and taking into account the fact that the assessment of the
goodwill also depends on the economic framework conditions that cannot be influenced by
the Group, we performed in addition a critical assessment of the sensitivity analyses
performed by PUMA SE for the cash-generating units (so-called CGUs) with low headroom
(present values compared to the carrying amount) in order to be able to assess a possible
impairment risk in case of change of a material valuation assumption.
Source: The full 2018 auditor’s report for Puma can be accessed at the company’s website;
see pages 197-199.
ILLUSTRATION 24.15 Key Audit Matters
According to audit standards, for each KAM that is included in the audit report, the auditor
will describe why the matter was considered to be significant and how it was addressed
during the audit. The goal of including KAMs in an audit report is to enhance the
communication value of the report. In Puma’s audit report, the KAM presented is related to
goodwill. Many of the accounting topics appearing in this text, including revenue recognition,
asset impairments, income taxes, inventory, and contingent liabilities, commonly appear as
KAMs.
The audit report should provide useful information to the investor. One investment banker
noted, “Probably the first item to check is the auditor’s opinion to see whether or not it is a
clean one—‘in conformity with accepted accounting principles’—or is qualified in regard to
differences between the auditor and company management in the accounting treatment of
some major item, or in the outcome of some major litigation.”

--- Page 2231 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Heart of the Matter
Financial disclosure is one of a number of institutional features that contribute to
healthy security markets. In fact, a recent study of disclosure and other mechanisms
(such as civil lawsuits and criminal sanctions) found that good disclosure is the most
important contributor to a vibrant market. The study, which compared disclosure and
other legal and regulatory elements across 49 countries, found that countries with the
best disclosure laws have the biggest securities markets.
Countries with more successful market environments also tend to have regulations that
make it relatively easy for private investors to sue companies that provide bad
information. While criminal sanctions can be effective in some circumstances,
disclosure and other legal and regulatory elements encouraging good disclosure are the
most important determinants of highly liquid and deep securities markets. And it does
not matter whether we are talking about securities exchanges or bond markets. In fact,
at a recent bond dealers’ conference, underwriters were told it is best to walk away from
deals that do not measure up with respect to the disclosure standards established by
regulators.
These findings hold for nations in all stages of economic development, with particular
importance for nations that are in the early stages of securities regulation. In addition,
countries with fewer market protections likely will benefit the most from adoption of
international standards for market regulation and disclosure. The lesson: Disclosure is
good for your market.
Sources: Rebecca Christie, “Study: Disclosure at Heart of Effective Securities Laws,” Wall Street Journal Online
(August 11, 2003); and L. Hail, C. Leuz, and P. Wysocki, “Global Accounting Convergence and the Potential
Adoption of IFRS by the U.S. (Part I): Conceptual Underpinnings and Economic Analysis,” Accounting Horizons
(September 2010). See also N. Trentmann, “Financial Reports: Could Be Better, Says U.K. Regulator,” Wall Street
Journal (October 23, 2017).
Management’s Reports
Management Commentary
Management commentary helps in the interpretation of the financial position, financial
performance, and cash flows of a company. For example, a company such as Ahold
Delhaize (NLD/BEL) may present, outside the financial statements, a financial review by
management that describes and explains the main features of the company’s financial
performance and financial position, and the principal uncertainties it faces. Such a report
may include a review of:
The main factors and influences determining financial performance, including changes
in the environment in which the entity operates, the entity’s response to those changes
and their effect, and the company’s policy for investment to maintain and enhance
financial performance, including its dividend policy;
The company’s sources of funding and its targeted ratio of liabilities to equity; and

--- Page 2232 ---
The company’s resources not recognized in the statement of financial position in
accordance with IFRS.
Such commentary also provides an opportunity to understand management’s objectives and
its strategies for achieving those objectives. Users of financial reports, in their capacity as
capital providers, routinely use the type of information provided in management
commentary as a tool for evaluating an entity’s prospects and its general risks, as well as the
success of management’s strategies for achieving its stated objectives (see Underlying
Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
The IASB Conceptual Framework notes that management knows more about the
company than users and therefore can increase the usefulness of financial information
by identifying significant transactions that affect the company and by explaining their
financial impact.
For many companies, management commentary is already an important element of their
communication with the capital markets, supplementing as well as complementing the
financial statements. Management commentary encompasses reporting that is described in
various jurisdictions as management’s discussion and analysis (MD&A), operating and
financial review (OFR), or management’s report.
Illustration 24.16 presents an excerpt from the MD&A section of Lectra’s (FRA) annual
report.

--- Page 2233 ---
Lectra
Management Discussion and Analysis (in part)
4. RISK FACTORS - INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT
PROCEDURES
This chapter describes the main risks facing the Group with regards to the specific
characteristics of its business, of its structure and its organization, of its strategy and its
business model. It further describes how the Group manages and prevents these risks,
depending on their nature.
4.1 Risk factors
For internal control and risk management to be effective, the Group needs to be able to
identify and assess the risks to which it is subject, namely the possible occurrence of an
event whose consequences could affect the Company’s human capital, assets, environment,
goals, together with its activity, financial condition, financial results, ability to achieve its
goals, or reputation.
The risk factors are divided into two main categories: risks relating to the environment in
which the Group operates, and operational risks relating to its activity.
4.1.1 Risks related to the environment in which the Group operates
4.1.1.1 Macroeconomic and geopolitical environment
The solutions marketed by the Group represent a sometimes sizable investment for its
customers. Decisions depend in part on the macroeconomic environment and on the state
of the sectors of activity in which the customers operate. Customers could scale back or
defer their investment decisions when global economic growth slows or when a particular
sector suffers a downturn or is in crisis. The Group is consequently exposed to the global
economic cycles. The economic development of the countries where the Group operates is
mixed, and for some of them their political, economic and monetary situation either has
deteriorated or is at risk of doing so.
The key factor protecting the Group against changes in the environment in which the Group
operates is its business model, and in particular:
a distribution of business activity over market sectors and geographic markets with
cycles that are different from each other, and the very large number of customers
throughout the world;
a balanced revenue mix between revenues from new systems sales, the Company’s
growth driver, and revenues from recurring contracts, consumables and parts that
provide a cushion in periods of difficult economic conditions.
4.1.1.2 Market risks
Because of its international presence, foreign exchange risk is the main market risk to
which the Group is exposed.

--- Page 2234 ---
Specific foreign exchange risks
The Group is exposed to financial risks resulting from variations in certain currencies
against the euro, a substantial proportion of its revenues being denominated in these
different currencies.
The impact of these fluctuations on the Group’s activity and financial statements is
especially significant since the site where final assembly and testing of the equipment it
produces and markets takes place, is located in France, and since most of its subcontractors
are located in the Eurozone.
Nearly all foreign-currency positions in the Company’s statement of financial position are
hedged by forward sales and purchases of currencies.
Stock market risks
The Group holds no interests in listed companies other than its own shares held under a
Liquidity Agreement (see note 15.2 to the consolidated financial statements), or more
generally under the new share repurchase program submitted for approval by the
Shareholders’ Meeting of April 30, 2019 (see chapter 10). At December 31, 2018, the Group
held 0.1% of its own shares in treasury, solely in the framework of the Liquidity Agreement.
Accordingly, it is not subject to stock market risk.
4.1.1.3 Risks related to the effects of climate change
Given its activity, and because of the concentration of its industrial operations at its
Bordeaux-Cestas site, the Company does not consider the risks related to the effects of
climate change to be material. However, the Company cannot exclude that, in some parts of
the world, extreme climate events could have an impact on its customers, their activity and
their investment decisions. This risk is minimized, however, by the location of the Group’s
activity across the entire world.
ILLUSTRATION 24.16 Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Alternative Performance Measures
Company management often develops performance measures that are used to evaluate the
financial position and performance of the entity and its various components. Some of the
measures are based on financial statement items that are defined and required by IFRS. For
example, management may regularly review the ratio of debt to equity to gain insight into
how the financial leverage of the entity is changing. However, management may also develop
measures that do not rely solely on IFRS-defined financial statement items, such as a
revenue growth measure based on constant currency, to remove the impact on the change in
revenue caused by currency exchange rate changes. Measures not based solely on IFRS-
defined measures are referred to as alternative (or management) performance
measures.
Many companies include these measures in their management commentary because they
believe it provides financial statement users with additional insight on how the company is
being managed and how it is performing. Current best practice is to provide discussion of
each alternative measure that explains how it is calculated, why it is useful to management,
and how it is reconciled to the relevant information in the financial statements. Illustration
24.17 presents a selection of the alternative performance measures reported by Marks and
Spencer plc (GBR).

--- Page 2235 ---
Marks and Spencer plc
Alternative Performance Measures (in part)
The Group tracks a number of alternative performance measures in managing its business,
which are not defined or specified under the requirements of IFRS because they exclude
amounts that are included in, or include amounts that are excluded from, the most directly
comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with IFRS, or are calculated
using financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with IFRS.
The Group believes that these alternative performance measures, which are not considered
to be a substitute for or superior to IFRS measures, provide stakeholders with additional
helpful information on the performance of the business. These alternative performance
measures are consistent with how the business performance is planned and reported within
the internal management reporting to the Board. Some of these alternative performance
measures are also used for the purpose of setting remuneration targets.
These alternative performance measures should be viewed as supplemental to, but not as a
substitute for, measures presented in the consolidated financial information relating to the
Group, which are prepared in accordance with IFRS. The Group believes that these
alternative performance measures are useful indicators of its performance. However, they
may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures reported by other companies due to
differences in the way they are calculated.
APM
Closest
equivalent
statutory
measure
Reconciling
items to
statutory
measure
Definition and purpose
Management
gross margin
Gross profit
margin
Certain
downstream
logistics costs
Where referred to throughout the Annual
Report, management gross margin is calculated
as gross profit on a management basis divided by
revenue. The gross profit used in this calculation
is based on an internal measure of margin rather
than the statutory margin, which excludes
certain downstream logistics costs. This is a key
internal management metric for assessing
category performance.
Net debt
None
Reconciliation
of debt – Note
27
Net debt comprises total borrowings (bank,
bonds and finance lease liabilities net of accrued
interest), net derivative financial instruments
that hedge the debt and the Scottish Limited
Partnership liability to the Marks and Spencer
UK pension scheme less cash, cash equivalents
and unlisted and short-term investments.

--- Page 2236 ---
This measure is a good indication of the strength
of the Group’s balance sheet position and is
widely used by credit rating agencies.
Free cash
flow
Net cash
inflow from
operating
activities
See Financial
Review
The cash generated from the Group’s operating
activities less capital expenditure and interest
paid.
This measure shows the cash retained by the
Group in the year.
ILLUSTRATION 24.17 Alternative Performance Measures
Some companies use the management commentary section of the annual report to disclose
company efforts in the area of sustainability. An excerpt from M&S’s annual report is
presented in Illustration 24.18.

--- Page 2237 ---
Marks and Spencer plc
Plan A Review
Plan A is a multi-year sustainability transformation plan that has been updated several
times (2010, 2014 and 2017) to reflect the evolution of our business and the risks and
opportunities that social and environmental issues pose for us.
As we go through our business transformation we are currently updating Plan A to reflect
our new structures and commercial priorities. This process is not yet complete but as in
previous years we are publishing datasets on our most material issues in our 2019 Plan A
Performance update.
These datasets show a mixed performance this year, reflecting a period of considerable
change across the business. We also offer an audit trail where we highlight existing
commitments that we know already we will not be pursuing in the future. Leadership on
social and environmental issues remains central to our promise to our customers and
colleagues. Once our current comprehensive review of Plan A is completed we will publish
our new approach.
Our actions are aligned in support of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Further details about Plan A, our policies, performance and activities can be found online at:
marksandspencer.com/plana
Our Goals:
Places: To help transform 1,000 communities.
People: To help 10 million people live happier healthier lives.
Planet: To become a zero-waste business.
Plan A Measurements
Places:
Transforming Communities: 10 new communities engaged as part of our Helping to
Transform Communities Initiative.
Volunteering Hours: 47,218 hours of work-time volunteering across the UK and
Republic of Ireland
Work Placements: 2,554 to people from disadvantaged groups in the community.
People:
Empowerment: 83% of our colleagues feel that they are trusted and have the freedom
to perform their role effectively.
Engagement: 81% of our colleagues feel proud to work at M&S and enjoy what they do.

--- Page 2238 ---
Enablement: 76% of our colleagues feel that they have the right processes, support and
tools to do their job well.
Planet:
Packaging Recycled: 70% of all M&S product packaging that ends up with customers is
classified as being widely recycled in the UK.
Waste Sent to Landfill: Zero of the waste generative by our stores, offices, and
warehouses was sent to the landfill.
M&S Greenhouse Gas Emissions: 360,000 tons of CO2 emissions down 16% from last
year and down 75% since 2006/2007.
ILLUSTRATION 24.18 Sustainability Reporting
Additional reporting on sustainability is important because it indicates a company’s level of
social responsibility and can provide insights about potential obligations that are reported in
the financial statements.
While there are no formal IFRS requirements for management commentary, the IASB has
issued a practice statement that offers a non-binding framework and limited guidance on its
application, which can be adapted to the legal and economic circumstances of individual
jurisdictions. While the statement is focused on publicly traded entities, to the extent that
the framework is deemed applicable, it may be a useful tool for non-exchange traded entities,
for example, privately held and state-owned enterprises.11
Management’s Responsibilities for Financial Statements
Management is responsible for preparing the financial statements and establishing and
maintaining an effective system of internal controls. The auditor provides an independent
assessment of whether the financial statements are prepared in accordance with IFRS (see
the audit opinion in Illustration 24.13). An example of the type of disclosure that public
companies are now making is shown in Illustration 24.19.

--- Page 2239 ---
Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc
Statement of Directors’ responsibilities in respect of the Annual Report and
Financial Statements (in part)
The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the Financial Statements
in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
Company law requires the Directors to prepare financial statements for each financial
period. Under that law the Directors have prepared the Group financial statements in
accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) as adopted by the
European Union and Company financial statements in accordance with United Kingdom
Generally Accepted Accounting Practice (United Kingdom Accounting Standards,
comprising FRS 101 ‘Reduced Disclosure Framework’, and applicable law). Under company
law the Directors must not approve the financial statements unless they are satisfied that
they give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Group and Company and of the
profit or loss of the Group and Company for that period. In preparing the financial
statements, the Directors are required to:
select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently;
state whether applicable IFRSs as adopted by the European Union have been followed
for the Group financial statements, and United Kingdom Accounting Standards,
comprising FRS 101, have been followed for the Company financial statements, subject
to any material departures disclosed and explained in the financial statements;
make judgements and accounting estimates that are reasonable and prudent; and
prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to
presume that the Group and Company will continue in business.
The Directors are responsible for keeping adequate accounting records that are sufficient to
show and explain the Group and Company’s transactions and disclose with reasonable
accuracy at any time the financial position of the Group and Company and enable them to
ensure that the financial statements and the Directors’ remuneration report comply with
the Companies Act 2006 and, as regards the Group financial statements, Article 4 of the IAS
Regulation.
The Directors are also responsible for safeguarding the assets of the Group and Company
and hence for taking reasonable steps for the prevention and detection of fraud and other
irregularities.
The Directors are responsible for the maintenance and integrity of the Group and
Company’s website. Legislation in the United Kingdom governing the preparation and
dissemination of financial statements may differ from legislation in other jurisdictions.
The Directors consider that the Annual Report and accounts, taken as a whole, is fair,
balanced and understandable and provides the information necessary for shareholders to
assess the Group and Company’s position and performance, business model and strategy. …

--- Page 2240 ---
Assessment of whether the Annual Report is fair, balanced and understandable
As required by the Code, the Directors confirm that they consider that the Annual Report,
taken as a whole, is fair, balanced and understandable and provides the information
necessary for shareholders to assess the Group’s position and performance, business model
and strategy.
When arriving at this position the Board was assisted by a number of processes including
the following:
the Annual Report is drafted by appropriate senior management with overall co-
ordination by the Chief Financial and Commercial Officer to ensure consistency across
sections;
an extensive verification process is undertaken to ensure factual accuracy; and
comprehensive reviews of drafts of the report are undertaken by members of the
Executive Committee and other senior management; and the final draft is reviewed by
the Audit Committee prior to consideration by the Board.
Responsibility statement We confirm that to the best of our knowledge:
the financial statements, prepared in accordance with the applicable set of accounting
standards, give a true and fair view of the assets, liabilities, financial position and profit
or loss of the Group and its subsidiaries included in the consolidation as a whole; and
the Strategic report includes a fair review of the development of the business and the
position of the Group and its subsidiaries included in the consolidation taken as a
whole, together with a description of the principal risks and uncertainties that they
face.
By order of the Board
12 March 2019
ILLUSTRATION 24.19 Report on Management’s Responsibilities
Current Reporting Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Describe other reporting issues related to implementation of the full disclosure
principle.
Reporting on Financial Forecasts and Projections
In recent years, the investing public’s demand for more and better information has focused
on disclosure of company expectations for the future.12 These disclosures take one of two
forms:13
Financial forecasts. A financial forecast is a set of prospective financial statements
that present, to the best of the responsible party’s knowledge and belief, a company’s

--- Page 2241 ---
expected financial position, results of operations, and cash flows. The responsible party
bases a financial forecast on conditions it expects to exist and the course of action it
expects to take.
Financial projections. Financial projections are prospective financial statements
that present, to the best of the responsible party’s knowledge and belief, given one or
more hypothetical assumptions, an entity’s expected financial position, results of
operations, and cash flows. The responsible party bases a financial projection on
conditions it expects would exist and the course of action it expects would be taken,
given one or more hypothetical assumptions.
The difference between a financial forecast and a financial projection is clear-cut: A forecast
provides information on what is expected to happen, whereas a projection provides
information on what might take place but is not necessarily expected to happen.
Whether companies should be required to provide financial forecasts is the subject of
intensive discussion with journalists, company executives, market regulators, financial
analysts, accountants, and others. Predictably, there are strong arguments on either side.
Listed below are some of the arguments.
Arguments for requiring published forecasts:
1. Investment decisions are based on future expectations. Therefore, information about the
future facilitates better decisions.
2. Companies already circulate forecasts informally. This situation should be regulated to
ensure that the forecasts are available to all investors.
3. Circumstances now change so rapidly that historical information is no longer adequate
for prediction.
Arguments against requiring published forecasts:
1. No one can predict the future. Therefore, forecasts will inevitably be wrong. Worse, they
may mislead if they convey an impression of precision about the future.
2. Companies may strive only to meet their published forecasts, thereby failing to produce
results that are in the shareholders’ best interest.
3. If forecasts prove inaccurate, there will be recriminations and probably legal actions.14
4. Disclosure of forecasts will be detrimental to organizations because they can be read not
only by investors, but also by competitors (foreign and domestic).
Auditing standards establish guidelines for the preparation and presentation of financial
forecasts and projections.15 They require accountants to provide (1) a summary of significant
assumptions used in the forecast or projection and (2) guidelines for minimum presentation.
To encourage management to disclose prospective financial information, some market
regulators have established a safe harbor rule. It provides protection to a company that
presents an erroneous forecast, as long as the company prepared the forecast on a reasonable
basis and disclosed it in good faith.16 However, many companies note that the safe harbor
rule does not work in practice, since it does not cover oral statements, nor has it prevented
investor lawsuits.

--- Page 2242 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Global Forecasts
Great Britain permits financial forecasts, and the results have been fairly successful.
Some significant differences do exist between the English business and legal
environments, and those of other countries. The British system, for example, does not
permit litigation on forecasted information, and a solicitor (lawyer) is not permitted to
work on a contingent-fee basis. A typical British forecast adapted from a construction
company’s report to support a public offering of shares is as follows.
Profits have grown substantially over the past 10 years and directors are confident of
being able to continue this expansion…. While the rate of expansion will be dependent
on the level of economic activity in Ireland and England, the group is well structured to
avail itself of opportunities as they arise, particularly in the field of property
development, which is expected to play an increasingly important role in the group’s
future expansion.
Profits before taxation for the half year ended 30th June were 402,000 pounds. On the
basis of trading experiences since that date and the present level of sales and
completions, the directors expect that in the absence of unforeseen circumstances, the
group’s profits before taxation for the year to 31st December will be not less than
960,000 pounds.
No dividends will be paid in respect of the current year. In a full financial year, on the
basis of above forecasts (not including full year profits) it would be the intention of the
board, assuming current rates of tax, to recommend dividends totaling 40% (of after-tax
profits), which will be payable in the next two years.
A general narrative-type forecast might appear as follows.
On the basis of promotions planned by the company for the second half of the fiscal
year, net earnings for that period are expected to be approximately the same as those
for the first half of the fiscal year, with net earnings for the third quarter expected to
make the predominant contribution to net earnings for the second half of the year.
As indicated, the general version is much less specific in its forecasted information.
But such differences probably could be overcome if influential interests cooperated to
produce an atmosphere conducive to quality forecasting. What do you think? As an
investor, would you prefer the more specific forecast?
Source: See “A Case for Forecasting—The British Have Tried It and Find That It Works,” World (New York: Peat,
Marwick, Mitchell & Co., Autumn 1978), pp. 10–13. In a more recent survey, U.K. companies remain stubbornly
backward-looking. Just 5 percent of FTSE 100 companies address the future of the business in their discussion and
analysis. See PricewaterhouseCoopers, “Guide to Forward-looking Information: Don’t Fear the Future” (2006).
Questions of Liability
What happens if a company does not meet its forecasts? Can the company and the auditor be
sued? If a company, for example, projects an earnings increase of 15 percent and achieves

--- Page 2243 ---
only 5 percent, should shareholders be permitted to have some judicial recourse against the
company?
One court case involving Monsanto Chemical Corporation (USA) set a precedent.
Monsanto predicted that sales would increase 8 to 9 percent and that earnings would rise 4
to 5 percent. In the last part of the year, the demand for Monsanto’s products dropped as a
result of a business turndown. Instead of increasing, the company’s earnings declined.
Investors sued the company because the projected earnings figure was erroneous, but a
judge dismissed the suit because the forecasts were the best estimates of qualified people
whose intents were honest.
As indicated earlier, safe harbor rules are intended to protect companies that provide good-
faith projections. However, much concern exists as to how market regulators and the courts
will interpret such terms as “good faith” and “reasonable assumptions” when erroneous
forecasts mislead users of this information.
Internet Financial Reporting
Most companies now use the power and reach of the Internet to provide more useful
information to financial statement readers. All large companies have Internet sites, and a
large proportion of companies’ websites contain links to their financial statements and other
disclosures. The popularity of such reporting is not surprising, as companies can reduce the
costs of printing and disseminating paper reports with the use of Internet reporting.
Does Internet financial reporting improve the usefulness of a company’s financial reports?
Yes, in several ways. First, dissemination of reports via the Internet allows firms to
communicate more easily and quickly with users than do traditional paper reports. In
addition, Internet reporting allows users to take advantage of tools such as search
engines and hyperlinks to quickly find information about the firm and, sometimes, to
download the information for analysis, perhaps in computer spreadsheets. Finally, Internet
reporting can help make financial reports more relevant by allowing companies to
report expanded and more timely disaggregated data than is possible through paper-based
reporting. For example, some companies voluntarily report both weekly sales and segment
operating data on their websites.
Given the widespread use of the Internet, it is not surprising that organizations are
developing new technologies and standards to further enable Internet financial reporting. An
example is the increasing use of Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL), a
computer language adapted from the code of the Internet. It “tags” accounting data to
correspond to financial reporting items that are reported in the statement of financial
position, income statement, the cash flow statement, and even the notes to the financial
statements. Once tagged, any company’s XBRL data can be easily processed using
spreadsheets and other computer programs.
In fact, XBRL is a global language with common tags across countries. To support the use of
XBRL by companies reporting under IFRS, the IASB has developed the IFRS taxonomy, a
specific set of tags that support financial reporting using XBRL under IFRS guidance. The
taxonomy is updated on an annual basis. As more companies prepare their financial reports
using XBRL, users will be able to easily search a company’s reports, extract and analyze data,
and perform financial comparisons within industries and across countries.17
Fraudulent Financial Reporting

--- Page 2244 ---
Economic crime is on the rise around the world. A global survey of over 6,000 executives
from 54 countries documented the types of economic crimes, as shown in Illustration
24.20.18
ILLUSTRATION 24.20 Types of Economic Crime
As indicated, asset misappropriation, cybercrime, and bribery and corruption top the list. And
while the trend has declined slightly, the incidence of economic crime is stubbornly high,
with cybercrime jumping 25 percent. Also important and troubling, accounting fraud remains
above 15 percent and is ranked fifth in the economic crime hit parade.
Fraudulent financial reporting is defined as “intentional or reckless conduct, whether
act or omission, that results in materially misleading financial statements.”19 Fraudulent
reporting can involve gross and deliberate distortion of company records (such as inventory
count tags), or misapplication of accounting policies (failure to disclose material
transactions). The frauds reported in the illustration above, and recent events involving such
well-known companies as Parmalat (ITA), Mahindra Satyam (IND), and Société
Générale (FRA) indicate that more must be done to address this issue.
Causes of Fraudulent Financial Reporting
Fraudulent financial reporting usually occurs because of conditions in a company’s internal
or external environment. Influences in the internal environment relate to poor internal
control systems, management’s poor attitude toward ethics, or perhaps a company’s liquidity
or profitability. Those in the external environment may relate to industry conditions,
overall business environment, or legal and regulatory considerations.
Motivations for fraudulent financial reporting vary. The desire to obtain a higher share price,
avoid default on a loan covenant, or achieve personal gain (e.g., additional compensation,
promotion) are common incentives. Situational pressures on the company or an individual
manager also may lead to fraudulent financial reporting. Examples of these situational
pressures include the following.

--- Page 2245 ---
Sudden decreases in revenue or market share for a single company or an entire
industry.
Unrealistic budget pressures may occur when central headquarters arbitrarily
determines profit objectives (particularly for short-term results) budgets and without
taking actual conditions into account.
Financial pressure resulting from bonus plans that depend on short-term
economic performance. This pressure is particularly acute when the bonus is a
significant component of the individual’s total compensation.
Opportunities for fraudulent financial reporting are present in circumstances when the fraud
is easy to commit and when detection is difficult. Frequently, these opportunities arise from:
1. The absence of a board of directors or audit committee that vigilantly oversees
the financial reporting process.
2. Weak or non-existent internal accounting controls. This situation can occur, for
example, when a company’s revenue system is overloaded as a result of a rapid
expansion of sales, an acquisition of a new division, or the entry into a new, unfamiliar
line of business.
3. Unusual or complex transactions such as the consolidation of two companies, the
divestiture or closing of a specific operation, and the purchase and sale of derivative
instruments.
4. Accounting estimates requiring significant subjective judgment by company
management, such as the allowance for loan losses and the estimated liability for
warranty expense.
5. Ineffective internal audit staffs resulting from inadequate staff size and severely
limited audit scope.
A weak ethical climate in a company contributes to these situations. Opportunities for
fraudulent financial reporting also increase dramatically when the accounting policies
followed in reporting transactions are non-existent, evolving, or subject to varying
interpretations.20
As discussed earlier, auditing regulators have issued numerous auditing standards in
response to concerns of the accounting profession, the media, and the public.21 For example,
the standard on fraudulent financial reporting “raises the bar” on the performance of
financial statement audits by explicitly requiring auditors to assess the risk of material
financial misstatement due to fraud.22
Criteria for Making Accounting and Reporting Choices
Throughout this text, we have stressed the need to provide information that is useful in
predicting the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. To achieve this
objective, companies must make judicious choices between alternative accounting concepts,
methods, and means of disclosure. You may be surprised by the large number of choices that
exist among acceptable alternatives.
You should recognize, however, as indicated in Chapter 1, that accounting is greatly
influenced by its environment. It does not exist in a vacuum. Therefore, it is unrealistic to

--- Page 2246 ---
assume that the profession can entirely eliminate alternative presentations of certain
transactions and events. Nevertheless, we are hopeful that by adhering to the Conceptual
Framework, the profession will be able to focus on the needs of financial statement users
and eliminate diversity in practice where appropriate (see Underlying Concepts). The
IASB’s focus on principles-based standards is directed at these very issues. It seeks to
develop guidance that will result in accounting and financial reporting that reflects the
economic substance of the transactions, not the desired financial result of management. The
profession must continue its efforts to develop a sound foundation upon which to build
financial standards and practice. As Aristotle said, “The correct beginning is more than half
the whole.”
Underlying Concepts
The IASB statements on the objective of financial reporting, elements of financial
statements, and qualitative characteristics of accounting information are important
elements supporting accounting choices that result in high quality financial reporting.

--- Page 2247 ---
Evolving Issue
Disclosure Overload?
As we discussed in Chapter 1 and throughout the text, IFRS is gaining popularity around
the world. The U.S. SEC continues to evaluate whether adoption of IFRS by publicly
traded U.S. companies will be mandatory or voluntary. There is some debate on U.S.
readiness to make the switch. For example, there are several areas in which the FASB
and the IASB must iron out a number of technical accounting issues before they reach a
substantially converged set of accounting standards. Here is a list of six important areas
yet to be converged.
1. Error correction. According to IAS 8, it is not always necessary to retrospectively
restate financial results when a company corrects errors, especially if the
adjustment is impractical or too costly. U.S. GAAP, on the other hand, requires
restatements in many error-correction cases.
2. Death of LIFO. Last-in, first-out (LIFO) inventory accounting is prohibited under
IAS 2, so any U.S. company using the method will have to abandon it (and the tax
benefits) and move to another methodology. Although LIFO is permitted under U.S.
GAAP, the repeal of LIFO for tax purposes is an ongoing debate.
3. Reversal of impairments. IAS 36 permits companies to reverse impairment
losses up to the amount of the original impairment when the reason for the charge
decreases or no longer exists. However, U.S. GAAP bans reversal.
4. PP&E valuation. IAS 16 allows for the revaluation of property, plant, and
equipment, but the entire asset class must be revalued. That means a company can
choose to use the revaluation model if the asset class’s fair value can be measured
reliably. But, it must choose to use one model or the other; both cannot be used at
the same time. U.S. GAAP does not allow revaluation.
5. Component depreciation. Also under IAS 16, companies must recognize and
depreciate equipment components separately if the components can be physically
separated from the asset and have different useful life spans. In practical terms,
that means controllers will have to rely on the operations side of the business to
help assess equipment components. U.S. GAAP allows component depreciation, but
it is not required.
6. Development costs. Based on IAS 38, companies are permitted to capitalize
development costs as long as they meet six criteria. However, research costs are still
expensed. U.S. GAAP requires that all R&D costs be charged to expense when
incurred.
Some are already debating what will happen if U.S. companies adopt these new
standards. It is almost certain that expanded disclosure will be needed to help users
navigate accounting reports upon adoption of IFRS. As one accounting analyst said, “get
ready for an avalanche of footnotes.” Since using IFRS requires more judgment than
using U.S. GAAP, two to three times as many footnotes will be needed to explain the
rationales for accounting approaches. So while principles-based standards should

--- Page 2248 ---
promote more comparability, they also require investors to dig into the disclosures in
the footnotes. Otherwise, they risk becoming victims of information overload.
Sources: Marie Leone, “GAAP and IFRS: Six Degrees of Separation,” CFO.com (June 30, 2010); and T. Shumsky,
“As Company Disclosures Balloon, It’s Getting Easier to Bury Information,” Wall Street Journal (February 26,
2016).
APPENDIX 24A
Basic Financial Statement Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Explain financial statement analysis.
What would be important in studying a company’s financial statements? The answer
depends on your particular interest—whether you are a creditor, shareholder, potential
investor, manager, government agency, or labor leader. For example, short-term creditors
such as banks are primarily interested in the ability of the firm to pay its currently maturing
obligations. In that case, you would examine the current assets and their relation to short-
term liabilities to evaluate the short-run solvency of the firm.
Bondholders, on the other hand, look more to long-term indicators, such as the
enterprise’s capital structure, past and projected earnings, and changes in financial position.
Shareholders, present or prospective, also are interested in many of the features
considered by a long-term creditor. As a shareholder, you would focus on the earnings
picture because changes in it greatly affect the market price of your investment. You also
would be concerned with the financial position of the company because it affects indirectly
the stability of earnings.
The managers of a company are concerned about the composition of its capital structure
and about the changes and trends in earnings. This financial information has a direct
influence on the type, amount, and cost of external financing that the company can obtain. In
addition, the company managers find financial information useful on a day-to-day operating
basis in such areas as capital budgeting, breakeven analysis, variance analysis and gross
margin analysis, and for internal control purposes.
Perspective on Financial Statement Analysis
Readers of financial statements can gather information by examining relationships between
items on the statements and identifying trends in these relationships. The relationships are
expressed numerically in ratios and percentages, and trends are identified through
comparative analysis.
A problem with learning how to analyze statements is that the means may become an end in
itself. Analysts could identify and calculate thousands of possible relationships and trends.
But knowing only how to calculate ratios and trends without understanding how such
information can be used accomplishes little. Therefore, a logical approach to financial
statement analysis is necessary, consisting of the following steps.

--- Page 2249 ---
1. Know the questions for which you want to find answers. As indicated earlier,
various groups have different types of interest in a company.
2. Know the questions that particular ratios and comparisons are able to help
answer. These will be discussed in this appendix.
3. Match 1 and 2 above. By such a matching, the statement analysis will have a logical
direction and purpose.
Several caveats must be mentioned. Financial statements report on the past. Thus,
analysis of these data is an examination of prior history. When using such information in a
decision-making (future-oriented) process, analysts assume that the past is a reasonable
basis for predicting the future. This is usually a reasonable approach, but its limitations
should be recognized (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
Because financial statements report on the past, they emphasize the qualitative
characteristic of feedback value. This feedback value is useful because it can be used to
better achieve the qualitative characteristic of predictive value.
Also, ratio and trend analyses will help identify a company’s present strengths and
weaknesses. They may serve as “red flags” indicating problem areas. In many cases, however,
such analyses will not reveal why things are as they are. Finding answers about “why”
usually requires an in-depth analysis and an awareness of many factors about a company
that are not reported in the financial statements.
Another caveat is that a single ratio by itself is not likely to be very useful. For
example, analysts may generally view a current ratio of 2 to 1 (current assets are twice
current liabilities) as satisfactory. However, if the industry average is 3 to 1, such a
conclusion may be invalid. Even given this industry average, you may conclude that the
particular company is doing well if you know the previous year’s ratio was 1.5 to 1.
Consequently, to derive meaning from ratios, analysts need some standard against which to
compare them. Such a standard may come from industry averages, past years’ amounts, a
particular competitor, or planned levels.
Finally, awareness of the limitations of accounting numbers used in an analysis is
important. We will discuss some of these limitations and their consequences later in this
appendix.
Ratio Analysis
In analyzing financial statement data, analysts use various devices to bring out the
comparative and relative significance of the financial information presented. These devices
include ratio analysis, comparative analysis, percentage analysis, and examination of related
data. No one device is more useful than another. Every situation is different, and analysts
often obtain the needed answers only upon close examination of the interrelationships
among all the data provided. Ratio analysis is the starting point. Ratios can be classified as
follows.

--- Page 2250 ---
Major Types of Ratios
Liquidity Ratios. Measures of the company’s short-run ability to pay its maturing
obligations.
Activity Ratios. Measures of how effectively the company is using the assets
employed.
Profitability Ratios. Measures of the degree of success or failure of a given company
or division for a given period of time.
Coverage Ratios. Measures of the degree of protection for long-term creditors and
investors.23
We have integrated discussions and illustrations about the computation and use of these
financial ratios throughout this text. Illustration 24A.1 summarizes all of the ratios
presented in the text and identifies the specific chapters that presented that material.

--- Page 2251 ---
Summary of Ratios Presented in Earlier Chapters
Ratio
Formula for Computation
Reference
I. Liquidity
1. Current
ratio
Chapter
13
2. Quick or
acid-test
ratio
Chapter
13
3. Current
cash debt
coverage
Chapter 5
II. Activity
4. Accounts
receivable
turnover
Chapter 7
5. Inventory
turnover
Chapter 9
6. Asset
turnover
Chapter
11
III.
Profitability
7. Profit
margin
on sales
Chapter
11
8. Return
on assets
Chapter
11
Current assets
Current liabilities
Cash + Short-term investments + Accounts receivable (net)
Current liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities
Average current liabilities
Net sales
Average net accounts receivable
Cost of goods sold
Average inventory
Net sales
Average total assets
Net income
Net sales
Net income
Average total assets

--- Page 2252 ---
Summary of Ratios Presented in Earlier Chapters
9. Return
on
ordinary
share
capital—
equity
Chapter
15
10. Earnings
per share
Chapter
16
11. Payout
ratio
Chapter
15
IV. Coverage
12. Debt to
assets
ratio
Chapter
14
13. Times
interest
earned
Chapter
14
14. Cash debt
coverage
Chapter 5
15. Book
value per
share
Chapter
15
ILLUSTRATION 24A.1 Summary of Financial Ratios
Limitations of Ratio Analysis
Net income – Preference dividends
Average shareholders’ equity—ordinary
Net income – Preference dividends
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Cash dividends
Net income
Total liabilities
Total assets
Net income + Interest expense + Income tax expense
Interest expense
Net cash provided by operating activities
Average total liabilities
Shareholders’ equity—ordinary
Outstanding shares

--- Page 2253 ---
The reader of financial statements must understand the basic limitations associated with
ratio analysis. As analytical tools, ratios are attractive because they are simple and
convenient. But too frequently decision-makers base their decisions on only these simple
computations. The ratios are only as good as the data upon which they are based and the
information with which they are compared.
One important limitation of ratios is that they generally are based on historical cost,
which can lead to distortions in measuring performance. Inaccurate assessments of
the enterprise’s financial condition and performance can result from failing to incorporate
fair value information.
Also, investors must remember that where estimated items (such as depreciation and
amortization) are significant, income ratios lose some of their credibility. For
example, income recognized before the termination of a company’s life is an approximation.
In analyzing the income statement, users should be aware of the uncertainty surrounding
the computation of net income. As one analyst aptly noted, “The physicist has long since
conceded that the location of an electron is best expressed by a probability curve. Surely an
abstraction like earnings per share is even more subject to the rules of probability and
risk.”24
Probably the greatest limitation of ratio analysis is the difficult problem of achieving
comparability among firms in a given industry. Achieving comparability requires that
the analyst (1) identify basic differences in companies’ accounting policies and procedures,
and (2) adjust the balances to achieve comparability. Basic differences in accounting usually
involve one of the following areas.
1. Inventory valuation (FIFO, average-cost).
2. Depreciation methods, particularly the use of straight-line versus accelerated
depreciation.
3. Capitalization versus expensing of certain costs.
4. Investments in ordinary shares carried under the equity method versus fair value.
5. Differing treatments of postretirement benefit costs.
6. Questionable practices of defining discontinued operations, impairments, and unusual
items.
The use of these different alternatives can make a significant difference in the ratios
computed. For example, at one time Anheuser-Busch (now AB InBev (BEL)) (USA) noted
that if it had used a different inventory method, inventories would have increased
approximately $33,000,000. Such an increase would have a substantive impact on the
current ratio. Several studies have analyzed the impact of different accounting methods on
financial statement analysis. The differences in income that can develop are staggering in
some cases. Investors must be aware of the potential pitfalls if they are to be able to make
the proper adjustments (see Underlying Concepts).25

--- Page 2254 ---
Underlying Concepts
Consistency and comparability are important concepts for financial statement analysis.
If the principles and assumptions used to prepare the financial statements are
continually changing, accurate assessments of a company’s progress become difficult.
Finally, analysts should recognize that a substantial amount of important information
is not included in a company’s financial statements. Events such as industry changes,
management changes, competitors’ actions, technological developments, government
actions, and union activities are often critical to a company’s successful operation. These
events occur continuously, and information about them must come from careful analysis of
financial reports in the media and other sources. Indeed, many argue, in what is known as
the efficient-market hypothesis, that financial statements contain “no surprises” to those
engaged in market activities. They contend that the effect of these events is known in the
marketplace—and the price of the company’s shares adjusts accordingly—well before the
issuance of such reports.
Comparative Analysis
Comparative analysis presents the same information for two or more different dates or
periods, so that like items may be compared. Ratio analysis provides only a single snapshot,
for one given point or period in time. In a comparative analysis, an investment analyst can
concentrate on a given item and determine whether it appears to be growing or diminishing
year by year, and the proportion of such change to related items. Generally, companies
present comparative financial statements. They typically include two years of statement of
financial position information and three years of income statement information.
In addition, many companies include in their annual reports five- or 10-year summaries of
pertinent data that permit readers to examine and analyze trends. As indicated in IFRS, “the
presentation of comparative financial statements in annual and other reports enhances the
usefulness of such reports and brings out more clearly the nature and trends of current
changes affecting the enterprise.” Illustration 24A.2 presents a five-year condensed
statement, with additional supporting data, of Anetek Chemical Corporation.

--- Page 2255 ---
Anetek Chemical Corporation
Condensed Comparative Statements
(In millions)
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
10
Years
Ago
2012
20
Years
Ago
2002
Sales and other revenue:
Net sales
$1,600.0 $1,350.0 $1,309.7 $1,176.2 $1,077.5
$
636.2
$170.7
Other revenue
75.0
50.0
39.4
34.1
24.6
9.0
3.7
Total
1,675.0
1,400.0
1,349.1
1,210.3
1,102.1
645.2
174.4
Costs and other charges:
Cost of sales
1,000.0
850.0
827.4
737.6
684.2
386.8
111.0
Depreciation and amortization
150.0
150.0
122.6
115.6
98.7
82.4
14.2
Selling and administrative
expenses
225.0
150.0
144.2
133.7
126.7
66.7
10.7
Interest expense
50.0
25.0
28.5
20.7
9.4
8.9
1.8
Income taxes
100.0
75.0
79.5
73.5
68.3
42.4
12.4
Total
1,525.0
1,250.0
1,202.2
1,081.1
987.3
587.2
150.1
Net income for the year
$ 150.0
$ 150.0
$ 146.9 $ 129.2
$ 114.8 $ 58.0 $ 24.3
Other Statistics
Earnings per share on ordinary
shares (in dollars)a
$ 5.00
$ 5.00
$ 4.90
$ 3.58
$ 3.11 $ 1.66 $ 1.06
Cash dividends per share on
ordinary shares (in dollars)a
2.25
2.15
1.95
1.79
1.71
1.11
0.25
Cash dividends declared on
ordinary shares
67.5
64.5
58.5
64.6
63.1
38.8
5.7
Share dividend at approximate
market value
46.8
27.3
Taxes (major)
144.5
125.9
116.5
105.6
97.8
59.8
17.0
Wages paid
389.3
325.6
302.1
279.6
263.2
183.2
48.6
Cost of employee benefits
50.8
36.2
32.9
28.7
27.2
18.4
4.4
Number of employees at year
end (thousands)
47.4
36.4
35.0
33.8
33.2
26.6
14.6
Additions to property
$306.3
$192.3
$241.5
$248.3
$166.1 $185.0 $49.0
aAdjusted for share splits and share dividends.
ILLUSTRATION 24A.2 Condensed Comparative Financial Information

--- Page 2256 ---
Percentage (Common-Size) Analysis
Analysts also use percentage analysis to help them evaluate and compare companies.
Percentage analysis consists of reducing a series of related amounts to a series of
percentages of a given base. For example, analysts frequently express all items in an income
statement as a percentage of sales or sometimes as a percentage of cost of goods sold. They
may analyze a statement of financial position on the basis of total assets. Percentage analysis
facilitates comparison and is helpful in evaluating the relative size of items or the relative
change in items. A conversion of absolute dollar amounts to percentages may also facilitate
comparison between companies of different size.
Illustration 24A.3 shows a comparative analysis of the expense section of Anetek
Chemical for the last two years.
Anetek Chemical Corporation
Horizontal Comparative Analysis
(In millions)
2022
2021
Difference
% Change 
Inc. (Dec.)
Cost of sales
$1,000.0 $850.0
$150.0
17.6%
Depreciation and amortization
150.0
150.0
0
0
Selling and administrative expenses
225.0
150.0
75.0
50.0
Interest expense
50.0
25.0
25.0
100.0
Income taxes
100.0
75.0
25.0
33.3
ILLUSTRATION 24A.3 Horizontal Percentage Analysis
This approach, normally called horizontal analysis, indicates the proportionate change
over a period of time. It is especially useful in evaluating trends because absolute changes
are often deceiving.
Another comparative approach, called vertical analysis, is the proportional expression of
each financial statement item in a given period to a base figure. For example, Anetek
Chemical’s income statement using this approach appears in Illustration 24A.4.

--- Page 2257 ---
Anetek Chemical Corporation
Income Statement
(In millions)
Amount
Percentage of 
Total Revenue
Net sales
$1,600.0
96%
Other revenue
75.0
4
Total revenue
1,675.0
100
Less:
Cost of sales
1,000.0
60
Depreciation and amortization
150.0
9
Selling and administrative expenses
225.0
13
Interest expense
50.0
3
Income taxes
100.0
6
Total expenses
1,525.0
91
Net income
$ 150.0
9%
ILLUSTRATION 24A.4 Vertical Percentage Analysis
Vertical analysis is frequently called common-size analysis because it reduces all of the
statement items to a “common size.” That is, all of the elements within each statement are
expressed in percentages of some common number and always add up to 100 percent.
Common-size (percentage) analysis reveals the composition of each of the financial
statements.
In the analysis of the statement of financial position, common-size analysis answers such
questions as: What percentage of the capital structure is represented by equity, current
liabilities, or long-term debt? What is the mix of assets (percentage-wise) with which the
company has chosen to conduct business? What percentage of current assets is in inventory,
receivables, and so forth?
Common-size analysis of the income statement typically relates each item to sales. It is
instructive to know what proportion of each sales dollar is absorbed by various costs and
expenses incurred by the enterprise.
Analysts may use common-size statements to compare one company’s statements from
different years, to detect trends not evident from comparing absolute amounts. Also,
common- size statements provide intercompany comparisons regardless of size because they
recast financial statements into a comparable common-size format.
APPENDIX 24B
First-Time Adoption of IFRS
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Describe first-time adoption of IFRS.

--- Page 2258 ---
As discussed in Chapter 1, IFRS is growing in acceptance around the world. For example,
recent statistics indicate that over 50 percent of the Global Fortune 500 companies use IFRS.
And the chair of the IASB predicts that in the near future IFRS adoption will increase, from
more than 115 countries to nearly 150 countries.
When countries accept IFRS for use as accepted accounting policies, companies need
guidance to ensure that their first IFRS financial statements contain high-quality
information. Specifically, IFRS 1 requires that information in a company’s first IFRS
statements (1) be transparent, (2) provide a suitable starting point, and (3) have a cost that
does not exceed the benefits. [12]
The overriding principle in converting from national GAAP (e.g., U.S., Chinese,
or Russian) to IFRS (the conversion process) is full retrospective application of
all IFRS. Retrospective application—recasting prior financial statements on the basis of
IFRS—provides financial statement users with comparable information. However, the IASB
recognizes that full retrospective application may be difficult in some situations, particularly
when information related to past periods is not readily available. In response, the IASB has
established guidelines to ensure that financial statement users have high-quality comparable
information while balancing the costs and benefits of providing comparable data.
General Guidelines
The objective of the conversion process is to present a set of IFRS financial statements as if
the company had always reported on IFRS. To achieve this objective, a company must:
1. Identify the timing for its first IFRS statements.
2. Prepare an opening statement of financial position at the date of transition to IFRS.
3. Select accounting policies that comply with IFRS and apply these policies
retrospectively.
4. Consider whether to apply any optional exemptions and apply mandatory exceptions.
5. Make extensive disclosure to explain the transition to IFRS.
Relevant Dates
Once a company decides to convert to IFRS, it must decide on the transition date and the
reporting date. The transition date is the beginning of the earliest period for which full
comparative IFRS information is presented. The reporting date is the closing statement of
financial position date for the first IFRS financial statements.
To illustrate, assume that FirstChoice Company plans to provide its first IFRS statements for
the year ended December 31, 2023. FirstChoice decides to present comparative information
for one year only. Therefore, its date of transition to IFRS is January 1, 2022, and its
reporting date is December 31, 2023. The timeline for first-time adoption is presented in
Illustration 24B.1.

--- Page 2259 ---
ILLUSTRATION 24B.1 First-Time Adoption Timeline
Illustration 24B.1 shows the following.
1. The opening IFRS statement of financial position for FirstChoice on January 1,
2022, serves as the starting point (date of transition) for the company’s accounting
under IFRS.
2. The first full IFRS statements are shown for FirstChoice for December 31, 2023. In other
words, a minimum of two years of IFRS statements must be presented before a
conversion to IFRS occurs. As a result, FirstChoice must prepare at least one year of
comparative financial statements (for 2022) using IFRS.
3. FirstChoice presents financial statements in accordance with its national GAAP annually
to December 31, 2022.
Following this conversion process, FirstChoice provides users of the financial statements
with comparable IFRS statements for 2022 and 2023.
Implementation Steps
Opening IFRS Statement of Financial Position
As indicated, to start the conversion process, companies first prepare an opening IFRS
statement of financial position. This process involves the following steps.
1. Include all assets and liabilities that IFRS requires.
2. Exclude any assets and liabilities that IFRS does not permit.
3. Classify all assets, liabilities, and equity in accordance with IFRS.
4. Measure all assets and liabilities according to IFRS. [13]
Completing this process requires knowledge of both the prior GAAP used and IFRS (which
you have obtained by your study of this text). To illustrate, the following facts for NewWorld
SA are presented in Illustration 24B.2.

--- Page 2260 ---
Opening Statement of Financial Position
Facts: NewWorld SA is preparing to adopt IFRS. It is preparing its opening statement of
financial position on January 1, 2022. NewWorld identified the following accounting policy
differences between IFRS and the national GAAP it currently uses. Under national GAAP,
NewWorld:
1. Expenses development costs of €500,000 on a project that had met economic viability.
2. Does not make a provision for a warranty of €100,000 because the concept of a
“constructive obligation” was not recognized.
3. Does not capitalize design fees of €150,000 into the cost of machinery that was put into
service at the beginning of 2020 even though those costs were necessary to bring the
asset to its working condition. The machinery has a 5-year life, no residual value, and
NewWorld uses straight-line depreciation.
Question: How should NewWorld account for these items in its opening IFRS
statement of financial position?
Solution:
1. IFRS allows the deferral of development costs in this case (see Chapter 12), and
NewWorld should capitalize these costs.
2. IFRS requires recognition of a warranty provision (see Chapter 13), so a liability
should be recorded.
3. Under IFRS, all costs incurred in bringing an asset to its place and condition for its
intended use are capitalized into the cost of the asset.
ILLUSTRATION 24B.2 Policy Changes—Opening Statement of Financial
Position
Adjustments as a result of applying IFRS for the first time are generally recorded in retained
earnings. NewWorld makes the following entries on January 1, 2022, to adjust the accounts
to IFRS treatment.

--- Page 2261 ---
In each of these situations, NewWorld adjusts retained earnings for the differences between
IFRS and national GAAP to ensure that the opening statement of financial position is
reported in accordance with IFRS.
After recording these adjustments, NewWorld prepares its opening IFRS statement of
financial position. The January 1, 2022, statement of financial position is the starting point
(the date of transition). Subsequently, in 2022 and 2023, NewWorld prepares IFRS financial
statements internally. At December 31, 2023, it will formally adopt IFRS.26
Exemptions from Retrospective Treatment
In some cases, adjustments relating to prior periods cannot be reasonably determined. In
other cases, it is “impracticable” to provide comparable information because the cost of
generating the information exceeds the benefits. The IASB therefore targeted exemptions
from the general retrospective treatment where it appeared appropriate. Two types of
exemptions are provided—required and elective.
Required Exemptions
The Board identified a number of areas in which companies are prohibited from
retrospective application in first-time adoption of IFRS:
1. Estimates.
2. Hedge accounting.
3. Non-controlling interests.
4. Derecognition of financial assets and financial liabilities.
5. Classification and measurement of financial assets.
These required exemptions are imposed because implementation of retrospective application
in these areas generally requires companies to obtain information that may not be readily
available. In these cases, companies may have to re-create information about past
transactions with the benefit of hindsight. [15] For example, retrospective application with
respect to non-controlling interests requires information about conditions and estimates
made at the time of a business combination—often a difficult task. In addition, this exception
provides relief for companies that otherwise might have to determine the allocation of

--- Page 2262 ---
transactions between owners and non-controlling interests in periods prior to the transition
period.
Elective Exemptions
In addition to the required exemptions for retrospective treatment, the IASB identified
specific additional areas in which companies may elect exemption from
retrospective treatment. These exemptions provide companies some relief from full
retrospective application. This simplifies the preparation of the first-time IFRS statements.
Areas addressed in the text are presented in Illustration 24B.3.27
Companies may elect an exemption from retrospective application for one or more of the
following areas.
a. Share-based payment transactions.
b. Fair value or revaluation as deemed cost.
c. Leases.
d. Employee benefits.
e. Compound financial instruments.
f. Fair value measurement of financial assets or financial liabilities at initial recognition.
g. Decommissioning liabilities included in the cost of property, plant, and equipment.
h. Borrowing costs.
ILLUSTRATION 24B.3 Elective Exemption from Retrospective Treatment
Optional exemption from retrospective treatment is understandable for certain situations.
The accounting for the areas identified above generally requires a number of estimates and
assumptions at initial recognition and in subsequent accounting. Depending on the
accounting under previous GAAP, the information necessary for retrospective application
may not be available, or may be obtained only at a high cost. We discuss two examples.28
Exemption Example: Compound Securities
As discussed in Chapter 16, IFRS requires splitting the debt and equity components of
convertible debt, using the “with and without” approach. The subsequent accounting for the
debt element reflects effective-interest amortization on the estimated debt component.
However, if the liability component is no longer outstanding at the date of first-time
adoption, retrospective application involves separating two portions of equity. The first
portion is in retained earnings and represents the cumulative interest accredited on the
liability component. The other portion represents the original equity component. Since the
company would not have records on the debt once it is no longer outstanding, it would be
costly to re-create that information for retrospective application. As a result, a first-time
adopter need not separate these two portions if the liability component is no longer
outstanding at the date of transition to IFRS.

--- Page 2263 ---
Exemption Example: Fair Value or Revaluation as Deemed Cost
Companies can elect to measure property, plant, and equipment at fair value at the transition
date and use that fair value as their deemed cost in accounting for those assets subsequent
to the adoption of IFRS. This exemption may also be applied to intangible assets in certain
situations. By using the exemption, companies avoid re-creating depreciation records for
property, plant, and equipment, which is a costly exercise for many companies. In fact, in
providing this exemption, the IASB noted that reconstructed cost data might be less relevant
to users, and less reliable, than current fair value data. The Board therefore concluded that it
would allow companies to use fair value as deemed cost. A company that applies the fair
value as deemed cost exemption is not required to revalue the assets subsequent to first-time
adoption. [18]29
Presentation and Disclosure
Upon first-time adoption of IFRS, a company must present at least one year of comparative
information under IFRS. [19] To comply with IAS 1, an entity’s first IFRS financial
statements shall include at least three statements of financial position, two statements of
comprehensive income, two separate income statements (if presented), two statements of
cash flows, and two statements of changes in equity and related notes, including comparative
information. Companies must explain how the transition from previous GAAP to IFRS
affected its reported financial position, financial performance, and cash flows.
A company’s first IFRS financial statements shall include reconciliations of:
Its equity reported in accordance with previous GAAP to its equity in accordance with
IFRS at the transition date.
Its total comprehensive income in accordance with IFRS to total comprehensive income
in accordance with previous GAAP for the same period. The reconciliation should be
prepared for the latest period in the company’s most recent annual financial statements
under the previous GAAP. [20]
Further, if a statement of cash flows was presented under the company’s previous GAAP, any
material adjustments should be explained. For example, Jones plc first adopted IFRS in
2023, with a date of transition to IFRS of January 1, 2022. Its last financial statements in
accordance with previous GAAP were for the year ended December 31, 2022. An example of
Jones plc’s reconciling items and their effects on equity for first-time adoption is provided in
Illustration 24B.4 for the non-current assets section of the statement of financial position.
Through this disclosure, statement users are able to evaluate the impact of the adoption of
IFRS on the statement of financial position. In practice, it may be helpful to include cross-
references to accounting policies and supporting analyses that give further explanation of the
adjustments shown in the reconciliations.

--- Page 2264 ---
Jones plc
(amounts in thousands)
First-time adoption effects on equity at January 1, 2022 (date of transition to
IFRS)
Note
Previous
GAAP
Effect of
Transition
to IFRS on
Equity
IFRS
1
Property, plant, and equipment
£ 8,299
£100
£ 8,399
2
Goodwill
1,220
150
1,370
2
Intangible assets
208
(150)
58
3
Financial assets
3,471
420
3,891
Total non-current assets
£13,198
£520
£13,718
Notes to the reconciliation at January 1, 2022:
1. Depreciation was influenced by tax requirements in accordance with previous GAAP,
but in accordance with IFRS reflects the useful life of the assets. The cumulative
adjustment increased the carrying amount of property, plant, and equipment by £100.
2. Intangible assets in accordance with previous GAAP included £150 for items that are
transferred to goodwill because they do not qualify for recognition as intangible assets
in accordance with IFRS.
3. Financial assets are all classified as non-trading equity investments in accordance with
IFRS and are carried at their fair value of £3,891. They were carried at cost of £3,471 in
accordance with previous GAAP. The resulting gains of £294 (£420, less related
deferred tax of £126) are included in the accumulated other comprehensive income.
ILLUSTRATION 24B.4 Reconciling Items for Equity
Reconciling items for total comprehensive income for Jones with respect to the gross profit
section of the income statement are presented in Illustration 24B.5.

--- Page 2265 ---
Jones plc
(amounts in thousands)
Note
Previous
GAAP
Effect of Transition
to IFRS
IFRS
1, 2, 3
Revenue
£20,910
£
 0
£20,910
Cost of sales
(15,283)
(97)
(15,380)
Gross profit
£ 5,627
£(97)
£ 5,530
Notes to the reconciliation of total comprehensive income for 2022:
1. A pension liability is recognized in accordance with IFRS but was not recognized in
accordance with previous GAAP. The pension liability increased by £130 during 2022,
which caused increases in cost of sales (£50), distribution costs (£30), and
administrative expenses (£50).
2. Cost of sales is higher by £47 in accordance with IFRS because inventories include fixed
and variable production overhead in accordance with IFRS but not in accordance with
previous GAAP.
3. Depreciation was influenced by tax requirements in accordance with previous GAAP
but reflects the useful life of the assets in accordance with IFRS. The effect on the profit
for 2022 was not material.
Explanation of material adjustments to the statement of cash flows for 2022:
Income taxes of £133 paid during 2022 are classified as operating cash flows in accordance
with IFRS but were included in a separate category of tax cash flows in accordance with
previous GAAP. There are no other material differences between the statement of cash
flows presented in accordance with IFRS and the statement of cash flows presented in
accordance with previous GAAP.
ILLUSTRATION 24B.5 Reconciling Items for Total Comprehensive Income
Summary
When companies adopt IFRS, they must ensure that financial statement users receive high-
quality information in order to compare financial statements prepared under IFRS and
previous GAAP. IFRS guidelines are designed to ensure that upon first-time adoption,
financial statements are comparable and that the costs and benefits of first-time adoption are
effectively managed.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accounting policies
*activity ratios

--- Page 2266 ---
adjusted subsequent events
adverse opinion
alternative (or management) performance measures
auditor
auditor’s report
common costs
*common-size analysis
*comparative analysis
*coverage ratios
*deemed cost
differential disclosure
disclaimer of an opinion
discrete approach
errors
events after the reporting date
financial forecast
financial projection
fraud
fraudulent financial reporting
full disclosure principle
*horizontal analysis
integral approach
interim reports
key audit matters (KAMs)
*liquidity ratios
management approach
management commentary
modified opinion
non-adjusted subsequent events
notes to the financial statements
*opening IFRS statement of financial position
operating segment
*percentage analysis
*profitability ratios

--- Page 2267 ---
qualified opinion
related-party transactions
*reporting date
safe harbor rule
seasonality
subsequent events
*transition date
unmodified or clean opinion
*vertical analysis
XBRL
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the full disclosure principle and how it is implemented.
The full disclosure principle calls for financial reporting of any financial facts significant
enough to influence the judgment of an informed reader. Implementing the full disclosure
principle is difficult because the cost can be substantial and the benefits difficult to assess.
Disclosure requirements have increased because of (1) the growing complexity of the
business environment, (2) the necessity for timely information, and (3) the use of
accounting as a control and monitoring device. Notes in financial statement
preparation: Notes are the accountant’s means of amplifying or explaining the items
presented in the main body of the statements. Notes can explain in qualitative terms
information pertinent to specific financial statement items and can provide supplementary
data of a quantitative nature. Common note disclosures include such items as accounting
policies; inventories; property, plant, and equipment; creditor claims; contingencies and
commitments; and subsequent events.
2 Discuss the disclosure requirements for related-party transactions,
subsequent events, major business segments, and interim reporting.
In related-party transactions, one party has the ability to significantly influence the
actions of the other. As a result, IFRS requires disclosure of the relationship, a description of
the transactions including amounts, provisions for doubtful debts, and expenses recognized.
For events after the reporting date, a company should disclose any transactions that
materially affect its financial position or operating situation. Finally, aggregated figures hide
important information about the composition of these consolidated figures. There is no way
to tell from the consolidated data the extent to which the differing product lines contribute to
the company’s profitability, risk, and growth potential. As a result, the profession requires
segment information, with segments identified based on the management approach.
Interim reporting. Interim reports cover periods of less than one year. Two viewpoints
exist regarding interim reports. The discrete approach holds that each interim period should
be treated as a separate accounting period. The integral approach holds that the interim
report is an integral part of the annual report and that deferrals and accruals should take into

--- Page 2268 ---
consideration what will happen for the entire year. IFRS requires use of the discrete
approach.
Companies should use the same accounting policies for interim reports that they use for
annual reports. A number of unique reporting problems develop related to the following
items: (1) income taxes and (2) seasonality.
3 Identify the major disclosures in the auditor’s report and management’s
responsibilities for the financial statements.
The auditor expresses an unmodified or clean opinion if he or she is satisfied that the
financial statements present the financial position, results of operations, and cash flows
fairly in accordance with IFRS. A qualified opinion contains an exception to the standard
opinion; ordinarily, the exception is not of sufficient magnitude to invalidate the statements
as a whole.
An adverse opinion is required when the exceptions to fair presentation are so material that a
qualified opinion is not justified. A disclaimer of an opinion is appropriate when the auditor
has so little information on the financial statements that no opinion can be expressed.
Management commentary complements information reported in the financial
statements. This commentary frequently discusses financial aspects of an enterprise’s
business, such as liquidity, capital resources, results of operations, important risks, and
sustainability. Management’s responsibility for the financial statements is often indicated in
a letter to shareholders in the annual report.
4 Describe other reporting issues related to implementation of the full
disclosure principle.
Companies are permitted (not required) to include profit forecasts in their reports. To
encourage management to disclose such information, market regulators have issued a safe
harbor rule. The rule provides protection to a company that presents an erroneous forecast,
as long as it prepared the projection on a reasonable basis and disclosed it in good faith.
However, the safe harbor rule has not worked well in practice.
Fraudulent financial reporting is intentional or reckless conduct, whether through act or
omission, that results in materially misleading financial statements. Fraudulent financial
reporting usually occurs because of poor internal control, management’s lax attitude toward
ethics, and weak performance.
*5 Explain financial statement analysis.
Basic financial statement analysis involves examining relationships between items on
the statements (ratio and percentage analysis) and identifying trends in these relationships
(comparative analysis). Analysis is used to predict the future, but ratio analysis is limited
because the data are from the past. Also, ratio analysis identifies present strengths and
weaknesses of a company, but it may not reveal why they are as they are. Although single
ratios are helpful, they are not conclusive. For maximum usefulness, analysts must compare
them with industry averages, past years, planned amounts, and the like.

--- Page 2269 ---
Ratios are classified as liquidity ratios, activity ratios, profitability ratios, and
coverage ratios. (1) Liquidity ratio analysis measures the short-run ability of a company
to pay its currently maturing obligations. (2) Activity ratio analysis measures how effectively
a company is using its assets. (3) Profitability ratio analysis measures the degree of success
or failure of a company to generate revenues adequate to cover its costs of operation and
provide a return to the owners. (4) Coverage ratio analysis measures the degree of
protection afforded long-term creditors and investors.
Limitations of ratio analysis. Ratios are based on historical cost, which can lead to
distortions in measuring performance. Also, where estimated items are significant, ratios
lose some of their credibility. In addition, comparability problems exist because companies
use different accounting policies and procedures. Finally, analysts and other users must
recognize that a substantial amount of important information is not included in a company’s
financial statements.
Comparative analysis. Companies present comparative data, which generally includes two
years of statement of financial position information and three years of income statement
information. In addition, many companies include in their annual reports five- to 10-year
summaries of pertinent data that permit the reader to analyze trends.
Percentage analysis. Percentage analysis consists of reducing a series of related amounts
to a series of percentages of a given base. Analysts use two approaches. Horizontal analysis
indicates the proportionate change in financial statement items over a period of time; such
analysis is most helpful in evaluating trends. Vertical analysis (common-size analysis) is a
proportional expression of each item on the financial statements in a given period to a base
amount. It analyzes the composition of each of the financial statements from different years
(a) to detect trends not evident from the comparison of absolute amounts and (b) to make
intercompany comparisons of different-sized enterprises.
*6 Describe first-time adoption of IFRS.
Upon first-time adoption of IFRS, a company must prepare and present an opening IFRS
statement of financial position at the date of transition to IFRS. This is the starting point for
its accounting in accordance with IFRS. The general rule for first-time adoption of IFRS is
retrospective application. That is, a company shall recast prior financial statements on the
basis of IFRS, and use the same accounting policies in its opening IFRS statement of
financial position, and throughout all periods presented in its first IFRS financial statements.
Those accounting policies shall comply with each IFRS effective at the end of its first IFRS
reporting period. Companies provide at least one year of comparative statements prepared in
accordance with IFRS.
The opening IFRS statement of financial position. Companies must first prepare the
opening IFRS statement of financial position by (1) including all assets and liabilities that
IFRS requires; (2) excluding any assets and liabilities that IFRS does not permit; (3)
classifying all assets, liabilities, and equity in accordance with IFRS; and (4) measuring all
assets and liabilities according to IFRS. Companies must make entries through retrospective
application. After recording these adjustments, an opening IFRS statement of financial
position is prepared, which will reflect application of the same policies that will be applied in
the first IFRS financial statements.

--- Page 2270 ---
Exemptions to retrospective application in first-time adoption of IFRS. Given the
range of changes that might be required for first-time adoption, the IASB considered the
cost-benefit of retrospective application and developed targeted exemptions from
retrospective treatment, when the amount of the adjustment relating to prior periods cannot
be reasonably determined and when it is “impracticable” to provide comparable information.
These exemptions are classified as required (in which a company is prohibited from
retrospective application) and optional.
Presentation and disclosure requirements. Upon first-time adoption of IFRS, a
company presents at least one year of comparative information under IFRS. A company’s
first IFRS financial statements shall include at least three statements of financial position,
two statements of comprehensive income, two separate income statements (if presented),
two statements of cash flows, and two statements of changes in equity and related notes,
including comparative information. Companies also must explain how the transition from
previous GAAP to IFRS affected its reported financial position, financial performance, and
cash flows. A company’s first IFRS financial statements shall include reconciliations of its
equity and total comprehensive income in accordance with previous GAAP to its equity and
comprehensive income in accordance with IFRS.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions,
and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Konetzke AG, a publicly traded company, is preparing the financial data which it will issue
to its shareholders for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2022. Your job as a member of
the accounting team is to help determine the appropriate disclosures and any other
potential year-end adjustments. You have collected the following information.
1. Konetzke is involved in four separate industries. The following information is
available for each of the four industries. Konetzke wonders which segments are
reportable, under IFRS.
Operating
Segment
Total 
Revenue
Operating 
Profit (Loss)
Identifiable 
Assets
Badger
€ 60,000
€15,000
€167,000
Spartan
10,000
1,500
83,000
Cornhusker
23,000
(2,000)
21,000
Hawkeye
9,000
1,000
19,000
€102,000
€15,500
€290,000
2. On February 3, 2023, one of Konetzke’s customers declared bankruptcy. At December
31, 2022, this company owed Konetzke €15,000, of which €3,000 was paid in January
2023.
3. On January 18, 2023, one of the three major plants of the client burned down.

--- Page 2271 ---
4. On January 23, 2023, a strike was called at one of Konetzke’s largest plants, which
halted 30% of its production. As of today (February 13), the strike has not been
settled.
5. On February 1, 2023, the board of directors adopted a resolution accepting the offer of
an investment banker to guarantee the marketing of €1,200,000 of preference shares.
Instructions
a. State in each case how the 2022 financial statements would be affected, if at all.
Financial statements will be authorized for issuance on February 15, 2023.
b. Moving ahead to the first quarter of 2023, your team has compiled the following
summarized revenue and expense data for the first quarter of the year.
Sales revenue
€30,000
Cost of goods sold
18,000
Variable selling expenses
500
Fixed selling expenses
1,500
Included in the fixed selling expenses was the single lump-sum payment of €800 for
Internet advertisements for the entire year. Address the following with respect to the
first quarter report. (1) Explain whether Konetzke should report its operating results
for the quarter as if the quarter were a separate reporting period in and of itself, or as
if the quarter were an integral part of the annual reporting period. (2) State how the
sales revenue, cost of goods sold, and fixed selling expenses would be reflected in
Konetzke’s quarterly report prepared for the first quarter of 2023.
Solution
a. 
1. Konetzke first conducts the following three tests:
Revenue test: .10 × €102,000 = €10,200. The Badger (€60,000) and
Cornhusker (€23,000) segments both meet this test.
Operating profit (loss) test: .10 × (€15,000 + €1,500 + €1,000) = €1,750.
The Badger (€15,000) and Cornhusker (€2,000 absolute amount) segments
both meet this test.
Identifiable assets test: .10 × €290,000 = €29,000. The Badger (€167,000)
and Spartan (€83,000) segments both meet this test.
Thus, Konetzke has three reportable segments for which segment information
should be disclosed.
Regarding the subsequent events:
2. The financial statements should be adjusted for the expected loss pertaining to the
remaining receivable of €12,000. Such adjustment should reduce accounts
receivable to their realizable value as of December 31, 2022.
3. Disclose the fire loss in a footnote to the statement of financial position and refer to
it in connection with the income statement, since earnings power is presumably

--- Page 2272 ---
affected.
4. Strikes are considered general knowledge and therefore disclosure is not required.
Many auditors, however, would encourage disclosure in all cases.
5. Report the action of the new share issue in a footnote to the statement of financial
position.
b. 
1. The company should report its quarterly results as if each interim period is discrete.
2. The company’s revenue and expenses would be reported as follows on its quarterly
report prepared for the first quarter of 2023:
Sales revenue
€30,000
Cost of goods sold
18,000
Variable selling expenses
500
Fixed selling expenses
1,500
Sales revenue and cost of goods sold receive the same treatment as if this were an annual
report. Costs and expenses other than product costs should be charged to expense in interim
periods as incurred (and not allocated among interim periods.)
If the selling expenses reflect seasonality, one-fourth of Internet advertising could be
disclosed as an expense in the first quarter, assuming the advertising is constant throughout
the year. These costs can be deferred within the fiscal period if the benefits of the
expenditure clearly extend beyond the interim period in which the expenditure is made. A
revised quarterly report would appear as follows.
Sales revenue
€30,000
Cost of goods sold
18,000
Variable selling expenses
500
Fixed selling expenses
Advertising (€800 ÷ 4)
200
Other (€1,500 − €800)
700
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendices
to the chapter.
Questions
1. What are the major advantages of notes to the financial statements? What types of items
are usually reported in notes?
2. What is the full disclosure principle in accounting? Why has disclosure increased
substantially in the last 10 years?

--- Page 2273 ---
3. The IASB requires a reconciliation between the effective tax rate and the government’s
statutory rate. Of what benefit is such a disclosure requirement?
4. What type of disclosure or accounting do you believe is necessary for the following items?
a. Because of a general increase in the number of labor disputes and strikes, both within
and outside the industry, there is an increased likelihood that a company will suffer a
costly strike in the near future.
b. A company reports a loss on a discontinued operation (net of tax) correctly on the
income statement. No other mention is made of this item in the annual report.
c. A company expects to recover a substantial amount in connection with a pending refund
claim for a prior year’s taxes. Although the claim is being contested, counsel for the
company has confirmed the client’s expectation of recovery.
5. The following information was described in a note of Canon Packing.
“During August, Holland Products AG purchased 311,003 ordinary shares of the Company,
which constitutes approximately 35% of the shares outstanding. Holland has since obtained
representation on the Board of Directors.”
“An affiliate of Holland Products AG acts as a food broker for Canon Packing in the greater
Amsterdam marketing area. The commissions for such services after August amounted to
approximately €20,000.” Why is this information disclosed?
6. What are the major types of subsequent events? Indicate how each of the following
“subsequent events” would be reported.
a. Collection of a note written off in a prior period.
b. Issuance of a large preference share offering.
c. Acquisition of a company in a different industry.
d. Destruction of a major plant in a flood.
e. Death of the company’s chief executive officer (CEO).
f. Additional wage costs associated with settlement of a 4-week strike.
g. Settlement of an income tax case at considerably more tax than anticipated at year-end.
h. Change in the product mix from consumer goods to industrial goods.
7. What are diversified companies? What accounting problems are related to diversified
companies?
8. What quantitative materiality test is applied to determine whether a segment is
significant enough to warrant separate disclosure?
9. Identify the segment information that is required to be disclosed by IFRS.
10. What is an operating segment, and when can information about two operating segments
be aggregated?
11. The controller for Lafayette AG recently commented, “If I have to disclose our segments
individually, the only people who will gain are our competitors and the only people that will
lose are our present shareholders.” Evaluate this comment.

--- Page 2274 ---
12. What are interim reports? Why is a complete set of financial statements often not
provided with interim data?
13. What are the accounting problems related to the presentation of interim data?
14. Dierdorf SE, a closely held company, has decided to go public. The controller, Ed Floyd, is
concerned with presenting interim data when an inventory write-down is recorded. What
problems are encountered with inventories when quarterly data are presented?
15. What approaches have been suggested to overcome the seasonality problem related to
interim reporting?
16. An article in the financial press entitled “Important Information in Annual Reports This
Year” noted that annual reports include a management commentary section. What would
this section contain?
17. “The financial statements of a company are management’s, not the accountant’s.”
Discuss the implications of this statement.
18. Olga Conrad, a financial writer, noted recently, “There are substantial arguments for
including earnings projections in annual reports and the like. The most compelling is that it
would give anyone interested something now available to only a relatively select few—like
large shareholders, creditors, and attentive bartenders.” Identify some arguments against
providing earnings projections.
19. The following comment appeared in the financial press: “Inadequate financial disclosure,
particularly with respect to how management views the future and its role in the
marketplace, has always been a stone in the shoe. After all, if you don’t know how a company
views the future, how can you judge the worth of its corporate strategy?” What are some
arguments for reporting earnings forecasts?
20. What is the difference between an auditor’s unmodified opinion, or “clean” opinion, and
a modified one?
21. Jane Ellerby and Sam Callison are discussing the recent fraud that occurred at
LowRental Leasing plc. The fraud involved the improper reporting of revenue to ensure that
the company would have income in excess of $1 million. What is fraudulent financial
reporting, and how does it differ from an embezzlement of company funds?
*22. “The significance of financial statement data is not in the amount alone.” Discuss the
meaning of this statement.
*23. A close friend of yours, who is a history major and who has not had any college courses
or experience in business, is receiving the financial statements from companies in which he
has minor investments (acquired for him by his now-deceased father). He asks you what he
needs to know to interpret and evaluate the financial statement data that he is receiving.
What would you tell him?
*24. Distinguish between ratio analysis and percentage analysis relative to the interpretation
of financial statements. What is the value of these two types of analyses?
*25. In calculating inventory turnover, why is cost of goods sold used as the numerator? As
the inventory turnover increases, what increasing risk does the business assume?
*26. What is the relationship of the asset turnover to the return on assets?

--- Page 2275 ---
*27. Explain the meaning of the following terms: (a) common-size analysis, (b) vertical
analysis, (c) horizontal analysis, and (d) percentage analysis.
*28. Briefly explain the need for a standard on first-time adoption of IFRS.
*29. How are the date of transition and the date of reporting determined in first-time
adoption of IFRS?
*30. What are the characteristics of high-quality information in a company’s first IFRS
financial statements?
*31. What are the steps to be completed in preparing the opening IFRS statement of
financial position?
*32. What is the rationale for exemptions to retrospective application at first-time adoption
of IFRS?
*33. Briefly describe the required exemptions to retrospective application at first-time
adoption of IFRS.
*34. What are elective exemptions to retrospective application at first-time adoption of
IFRS?
*35. Briefly describe the deemed cost exemption to retrospective application at first-time
adoption of IFRS.
*36. If a company elects the deemed cost exemption, must it continue to use revaluation
accounting subsequent to first-time adoption? Explain.
*37. Briefly describe the presentation and disclosure requirements for first-time adoption of
IFRS.
Brief Exercises
BE24.1 (LO 1) An annual report of Crestwood Industries states, “The company and its
subsidiaries have long-term leases expiring on various dates after December 31, 2022.
Amounts payable under such commitments, without reduction for related rental income, are
expected to average approximately €5,711,000 annually for the next 3 years. Related rental
income from certain subleases to others is estimated to average €3,094,000 annually for the
next 3 years.” What information is provided by this note?
BE24.2 (LO 1) An annual report of Barclays plc states, “Net income per share is computed
based upon the average number of shares of all classes outstanding. Additional shares of
ordinary shares may be issued or delivered in the future on conversion of outstanding
convertible debentures, exercise of outstanding employee share options, and for payment of
deferred supplemental compensation. Had such additional shares been outstanding, net
income per share would have been reduced by 10¢ in the current year and 3¢ in the previous
year…. As a result of share transactions by the company during the current year (primarily
the purchase of Class A shares from Barclays Foundation), net income per share was
increased by 6¢.” What information is provided by this note?
BE24.3 (LO 2) Morlan SA is preparing its December 31, 2022, financial statements. Two
events that occurred between December 31, 2022, and March 10, 2023, when the statements
were authorized for issue, are described below.

--- Page 2276 ---
1. A liability, estimated at €160,000 at December 31, 2022, was settled on February 26,
2023, at €170,000.
2. A flood loss of €80,000 occurred on March 1, 2023.
What effect do these subsequent events have on 2022 net income?
BE24.4 (LO 2) Tina Bailey, an intermediate accounting student, was heard to remark after
a class discussion on segment reporting, “All this is very confusing to me. First we are told
that there is merit in presenting the consolidated results, and now we are told that it is better
to show segmental results. I wish they would make up their minds.” Evaluate this comment.
BE24.5 (LO 2) Foley Group has seven operating segments with total revenues as follows
(in millions).
Penley
¥600 Cheng ¥225
Konami
650 Takuhi
200
KSC
250 Molina
700
Red Moon
275
Based only on the revenues test, which operating segments are reportable?
BE24.6 (LO 2) Operating profits (losses) for the seven operating segments of Foley Group
are as follows (in millions).
Penley
¥ 90 Cheng ¥ (20)
Konami
(40) Takuhi
34
KSC
25 Molina
150
Red Moon
50
Based only on the operating profit (loss) test, which industry segments are reportable?
BE24.7 (LO 2) Identifiable assets for the seven industry segments of Foley Group are as
follows (in millions).
Penley
¥500 Cheng ¥200
Konami
550 Takuhi
150
KSC
250 Molina
475
Red Moon
400
Based only on the identifiable assets test, which industry segments are reportable?
*BE24.8 (LO 5) Answer each of the questions in the following unrelated situations.
a. The current ratio of a company is 5:1 and its acid-test ratio is 1:1. If the inventories and
prepaid items amount to $500,000, what is the amount of current liabilities?
b. A company had an average inventory last year of $200,000 and its inventory turnover
was 5 times. If sales volume and unit cost remain the same this year as last and
inventory turnover is 8 times this year, what will average inventory have to be during
the current year?

--- Page 2277 ---
c. A company has current assets of $90,000 (of which $40,000 is inventory and prepaid
items) and current liabilities of $40,000. What is the current ratio? What is the acid-test
ratio? If the company borrows $15,000 cash from a bank on a 120-day loan, what will its
current ratio be? What will the acid-test ratio be?
d. A company has current assets of $600,000 and current liabilities of $240,000. The
board of directors declares a cash dividend of $180,000. What is the current ratio after
the declaration but before payment? What is the current ratio after the payment of the
dividend?
*BE24.9 (LO 5) Heartland plc’s budgeted sales and budgeted cost of goods sold for the
coming year are £144,000,000 and £99,000,000, respectively. Short-term interest rates are
expected to average 10%. If Heartland can increase inventory turnover from its present level
of 9 times a year to a level of 12 times per year, compute its expected cost savings for the
coming year.
*BE24.10 (LO 6) Becker Ltd. is planning to adopt IFRS and prepare its first IFRS financial
statements at December 31, 2023. What is the date of Becker’s opening statement of
financial position, assuming one year of comparative information? What periods will be
covered in Becker’s first IFRS financial statements?
*BE24.11 (LO 6) Bohmann Company is preparing its opening IFRS statement of financial
position on January 1, 2022. Under its previous GAAP, Bohmann had capitalized all
development costs of $50,000. Under IFRS, only $10,000 of the costs related to a patent
were incurred after the project met economic viability thresholds. Prepare the entry (if any)
needed to record this adjustment at the date of transition.
*BE24.12 (LO 6) Stengel plc is preparing its opening IFRS statement of financial position
on January 1, 2022. Under its previous GAAP, Stengel used the LIFO inventory method.
Under LIFO, its inventory is reported at £250,000; under FIFO, which Stengel will use upon
adoption of IFRS, the inventory is valued at £265,000. Prepare the entry (if any) needed to
record this adjustment at the date of issuance.
*BE24.13 (LO 6) Latta Inc. is preparing its opening IFRS statement of financial position on
January 1, 2022. Under its previous GAAP, Latta had deferred certain advertising costs
amounting to $37,000. Prepare the entry (if any) needed to record this adjustment at the
date of issuance.
*BE24.14 (LO 6) Smitz Spa is preparing its opening IFRS statement of financial position on
January 1, 2022. Under its previous GAAP, Smitz did not record a provision for litigation in
the amount of €85,000 that would be recognized under IFRS. Prepare the entry (if any)
needed to record this adjustment at the date of issuance.
*BE24.15 (LO 6) Porter Company is evaluating the following assets to determine whether
it can use fair value as deemed cost in a first-time adoption of IFRS.
1. Biological assets related to agricultural activity for which there is no active market.
2. Intangible assets for which there is no active market.
3. Any individual item of property, plant, and equipment.
4. Financial assets that are not held for trading.
For each asset type, indicate if the deemed cost exemption can be used.

--- Page 2278 ---
Exercises
E24.1 (LO 2) (Subsequent Events) Keystone Corporation issued its financial statements
for the year ended December 31, 2022, on March 10, 2023. The following events took place
before the statements were authorized for issue early in 2023.
a. On January 10, 10,000 ordinary shares of $5 par value were issued at $66 per share.
b. On March 1, Keystone determined after negotiations with the taxing authorities that
income taxes payable for 2022 should be $1,320,000. At December 31, 2022, income
taxes payable were recorded at $1,100,000.
Instructions
Discuss how the preceding subsequent events should be reflected in the 2022 financial
statements.
E24.2 (LO 2) (Subsequent Events) Consider the following subsequent events.
____
1. Settlement of a tax case at a cost considerably in excess of the amount expected
at year-end.
____
2. Introduction of a new product line.
____
3. Loss of assembly plant due to fire.
____
4. Sale of a significant portion of the company’s assets.
____
5. Retirement of the company president.
____
6. Issuance of a significant number of ordinary shares.
____
7. Loss of a significant customer.
____
8. Prolonged employee strike.
____
9. Material loss on a year-end receivable because of a customer’s bankruptcy.
____
10. Hiring of a new president.
____

--- Page 2279 ---
11. Settlement of prior year’s litigation against the company.
____
12. Merger with another company of comparable size.
Instructions
For each event, indicate whether a company should (a) adjust the financial statements, (b)
disclose in notes to the financial statements, or (c) neither adjust nor disclose.
E24.3 (LO 2) (Segment Reporting) LaGreca SpA is involved in four separate industries.
The following information is available for each of the four segments.
Operating Segment Total Revenue Operating Profit (Loss) Identifiable Assets
W
€ 60,000
€15,000
€167,000
X
10,000
1,500
83,000
Y
23,000
(2,000)
21,000
Z
9,000
1,000
19,000
€102,000
€15,500
€290,000
Instructions
Determine which of the operating segments are reportable based on the:
a. Revenue test.
b. Operating profit (loss) test.
c. Identifiable assets test.
*E24.4 (LO 5) (Ratio Computation and Analysis; Liquidity) As loan analyst for
Murray Bank, you have been given the following information.
Plunkett plc Herring Ltd.
Assets
Other assets
£ 500,000
£ 612,000
Current assets
Inventories
570,000
518,000
Receivables
220,000
302,000
Cash
120,000
320,000
Total current assets
910,000
1,140,000
Total assets
£1,410,000
£1,752,000
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital and retained earnings
£ 710,000
£ 902,000
Non-current liabilities
400,000
500,000
Current liabilities
300,000
350,000
Total equity and liabilities
£1,410,000
£1,752,000

--- Page 2280 ---
Annual sales
£ 930,000 £1,500,000
Rate of gross profit on sales
30%
40%
Each of these companies has requested a loan of £50,000 for 6 months with no collateral
offered. Since your bank has reached its quota for loans of this type, only one of these
requests is to be granted.
Instructions
Judging from the information above, which of the two companies would you recommend as
the better risk and why? Assume that the ending account balances are representative of the
entire year.
*E24.5 (LO 5) (Analysis of Given Ratios) Robbins Company is a wholesale distributor of
professional equipment and supplies. The company’s sales have averaged about $900,000
annually for the 3-year period 2020–2022. The firm’s total assets at the end of 2022
amounted to $850,000.
The president of Robbins Company has asked the controller to prepare a report that
summarizes the financial aspects of the company’s operations for the past 3 years. This
report will be presented to the board of directors at its next meeting.
In addition to comparative financial statements, the controller has decided to present a
number of relevant financial ratios which can assist in the identification and interpretation
of trends. At the request of the controller, the accounting staff has calculated the following
ratios for the 3-year period 2020–2022.
2020
2021
2022
Current ratio
1.80
1.89
1.96
Acid-test (quick) ratio
1.04
0.99
0.87
Accounts receivable turnover
8.75
7.71
6.42
Inventory turnover
4.91
4.32
3.72
Debt to assets ratio
51.0% 46.0% 41.0%
Long-term debt to assets ratio
31.0% 27.0% 24.0%
Sales to fixed assets (fixed asset turnover)
1.58
1.69
1.79
Sales as a percent of 2020 sales
1.00
1.03
1.05
Gross margin percentage
36.0% 35.1% 34.6%
Net income to sales
6.9%
7.0%
7.2%
Return on assets
7.7%
7.7%
7.8%
Return on equity
13.6% 13.1% 12.7%
In preparing the report, the controller has decided first to examine the financial ratios
independent of any other data to determine whether the ratios themselves reveal any
significant trends over the 3-year period.
Instructions
a. The current ratio is increasing while the acid-test (quick) ratio is decreasing. Using the
ratios provided, identify and explain the contributing factor(s) for this apparently

--- Page 2281 ---
divergent trend.
b. In terms of the ratios provided, what conclusion(s) can be drawn regarding the
company’s use of financial leverage during the 2020–2022 period?
c. Using the ratios provided, what conclusion(s) can be drawn regarding the company’s net
investment in plant and equipment?
*E24.6 (LO 5) (Ratio Analysis) Howser Ltd. is a manufacturer of electronic components
and accessories with total assets of £20,000,000. Selected financial ratios for Howser and
the industry averages for firms of similar size are presented below.
Howser
2022
Industry
Average
2020 2021 2022
Current ratio
2.09 2.27 2.51
2.24
Quick ratio
1.15
1.12
1.19
1.22
Inventory turnover
2.40 2.18 2.02
3.50
Net sales to equity
2.75 2.80 2.95
2.85
Net income to equity
0.14 0.15
0.17
0.11
Total liabilities to equity
1.41 1.37 1.44
0.95
Howser is being reviewed by several entities whose interests vary, and the company’s
financial ratios are a part of the data being considered. Each of the parties listed below must
recommend an action based on its evaluation of Howser’s financial position.
Citizens National Bank. The bank is processing Howser’s application for a new 5-year
term note. Citizens National has been Howser’s banker for several years but must
reevaluate the company’s financial position for each major transaction.
Charleston Company. Charleston is a new supplier to Howser and must decide on the
appropriate credit terms to extend to the company.
Shannon Financial. A brokerage firm specializing in the shares of electronics firms
that are sold over-the-counter, Shannon Financial must decide if it will include Howser
in a new fund being established for sale to Shannon Financial’s clients.
Working Capital Management Committee. This is a committee of Howser’s
management personnel chaired by the chief operating officer. The committee is charged
with the responsibility of periodically reviewing the company’s working capital position,
comparing actual data against budgets, and recommending changes in strategy as
needed.
Instructions
a. Describe the analytical use of each of the six ratios presented above.
b. For each of the four entities described above, identify two financial ratios, from those
ratios presented in Illustration 24A.1, that would be most valuable as a basis for its
decision regarding Howser.
c. Discuss what the financial ratios presented in the question reveal about Howser.
Support your answer by citing specific ratio levels and trends as well as the

--- Page 2282 ---
interrelationships between these ratios.
*E24.7 (LO 6) (Opening Statement of Financial Position) Goodman AG is preparing
to adopt IFRS. In preparing its opening statement of financial position on January 1, 2022,
Goodman identified the following accounting policy differences between IFRS and its
previous GAAP.
1. Under its previous GAAP, Goodman classified proposed dividends of €45,000 as a
current liability.
2. Goodman had deferred advertising costs of €500,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries needed (if any) before preparation of Goodman’s opening
statement of financial position.
b. Determine the net change in equity from these adjustments.
*E24.8 (LO 6) (Opening Statement of Financial Position, Disclosure) Lombardo
Group is preparing to adopt IFRS. It is preparing its opening statement of financial position
on January 1, 2022. Lombardo identified the following accounting policy differences between
IFRS and its previous GAAP.
1. Lombardo had not made a provision for a warranty of €75,000 under previous GAAP
because the concept of a “constructive obligation” was not recognized.
2. Under previous GAAP, €60,000 paid for certain architect fees was not capitalized into
the cost of a building that was put into service at the beginning of 2021, even though
those costs were necessary to bring the asset to its working condition. The building has a
40-year life and no residual value, and Lombardo uses straight-line depreciation.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries needed (if any) before preparation of Lombardo’s opening
statement of financial position.
b. Determine the net change in equity from these adjustments.
c. Briefly describe the disclosures that Lombardo will make related to the adjustments in it
first IFRS financial statements.
Problems
P24.1 (LO 2) (Subsequent Events) Your firm has been engaged to examine the financial
statements of Almaden AG for the year 2022. The bookkeeper who maintains the financial
records has prepared all the unaudited financial statements for the company since its
organization on January 2, 2017. The client provides you with the following information.
Almaden AG
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Liabilities

--- Page 2283 ---
Almaden AG
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Equity
€4,650,600
Other assets
€5,171,400 Non-current liabilities
1,439,500
Current assets
1,881,100 Current liabilities
962,400
€7,052,500
€7,052,500
Current assets include:
Cash (restricted in the amount of €300,000 for plant expansion)
€ 571,000
Investments in land
185,000
Accounts receivable less allowance of €30,000
480,000
Inventories (weighted-average)
645,100
€ 1,881,100
Other assets include:
Prepaid expenses
€ 62,400
Plant and equipment less accumulated depreciation of €1,430,000
4,130,000
Notes receivable (short-term)
162,300
Goodwill
252,000
Land
564,700
€ 5,171,400
Current liabilities include:
Accounts payable
€ 510,000
Notes payable (due 2025)
157,400
Estimated income taxes payable
145,000
Share premium—ordinary
150,000
€ 962,400
Non-current liabilities include:
Unearned revenue
€ 489,500
Dividends payable (cash)
200,000
8% bonds payable (due May 1, 2027)
750,000
€ 1,439,500
Equity includes:
Retained earnings
€ 2,810,600
Share capital—ordinary, par value €10; authorized 200,000 shares, 184,000
shares issued
1,840,000
€ 4,650,600
The supplementary information below is also provided.

--- Page 2284 ---
1. On May 1, 2022, the company issued at par €750,000 of bonds to finance plant
expansion. The long-term bond agreement provided for the annual payment of interest
every May 1. The existing plant was pledged as security for the loan.
2. The bookkeeper made the following mistakes.
a. In 2020, the ending inventory was overstated by €183,000. The ending inventories
for 2021 and 2022 were correctly computed.
b. In 2022, accrued wages in the amount of €225,000 were omitted from the
statement of financial position, and these expenses were not charged on the income
statement.
c. In 2022, a gain of €175,000 (net of tax) on the sale of certain plant assets was
credited directly to retained earnings.
3. A major competitor has introduced a line of products that will compete directly with
Almaden’s primary line, now being produced in a specially designed new plant. Because
of manufacturing innovations, the competitor’s line will be of comparable quality but
priced 50% below Almaden’s line. The competitor announced its new line on January 14,
2023. Almaden indicates that the company will meet the lower prices, which are high
enough to cover variable manufacturing and selling expenses, but permit recovery of
only a portion of fixed costs.
4. You learned on January 28, 2023, prior to completion of the audit, of heavy damage
because of a recent fire in one of Almaden’s two plants; the loss will not be reimbursed
by insurance. The newspapers described the event in detail.
Instructions
Analyze the preceding information to prepare a corrected statement of financial position for
Almaden in accordance with IFRS. Prepare a description of any notes that might need to be
prepared. The books are closed, and adjustments to income are to be made through retained
earnings.
P24.2 (LO 2) (Segment Reporting) Cineplex Corporation is a diversified company that
operates in five different industries: A, B, C, D, and E. The following information relating to
each segment is available for 2022.
A
B
C
D
E
Sales revenue
$40,000
$ 75,000 $580,000 $35,000 $55,000
Cost of goods sold
19,000
50,000
270,000
19,000
30,000
Operating expenses
10,000
40,000
235,000
12,000
18,000
Total expenses
29,000
90,000
505,000
31,000
48,000
Operating profit (loss) $11,000 $(15,000)
$ 75,000 $ 4,000 $ 7,000
Identifiable assets
$35,000 $ 80,000 $500,000 $65,000 $50,000
Sales of segments B and C included intersegment sales of $20,000 and $100,000,
respectively.
Instructions
a. Determine which of the segments are reportable based on the:

--- Page 2285 ---
1. Revenue test.
2. Operating profit (loss) test.
3. Identifiable assets test.
b. Prepare the necessary disclosures required by IFRS.
*P24.3 (LO 5) 
 (Ratio Computations and Additional Analysis) Bradburn
plc was formed 5 years ago through a public subscription of ordinary shares. Daniel Brown,
who owns 15% of the ordinary shares, was one of the organizers of Bradburn and is its
current president. The company has been successful but is currently experiencing a shortage
of funds. On June 10, Daniel Brown approached the Hibernia Bank, asking for a 24-month
extension on two £35,000 notes, which are due on June 30, 2022, and September 30, 2022.
Another note of £6,000 is due on March 31, 2023, but he expects no difficulty in paying this
note on its due date. Brown explained that Bradburn’s cash flow problems are due primarily
to the company’s desire to finance a £300,000 plant expansion over the next 2 fiscal years
through internally generated funds.
The commercial loan officer of Hibernia Bank requested financial reports for the last 2 fiscal
years. These reports are reproduced below.
Bradburn plc
Statement of Financial Position
March 31
Assets
2022
2021
Plant and equipment (net of depreciation)
£1,449,000
£1,420,500
Inventories (at cost)
105,000
50,000
Accounts receivable (net)
131,800
125,500
Notes receivable
148,000
132,000
Cash
18,200
12,500
Total assets
£1,852,000
£1,740,500
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital—ordinary (130,000 shares, £10 par)
£1,300,000
£1,300,000
Retained earningsa
388,000
282,000
Accrued liabilities
9,000
6,000
Notes payable
76,000
61,500
Accounts payable
79,000
91,000
Total equity and liabilities
£1,852,000
£1,740,500
aCash dividends were paid at the rate of £1 per share in fiscal year 2021 and £2 per share in
fiscal year 2022.
Bradburn plc
Income Statement
For The Fiscal Years Ended March 31
2022
2021

--- Page 2286 ---
Bradburn plc
Income Statement
For The Fiscal Years Ended March 31
Sales revenue
£3,000,000
£2,700,000
Cost of goods solda
1,530,000
1,425,000
Gross margin
1,470,000
1,275,000
Operating expenses
860,000
780,000
Income before income taxes
610,000
495,000
Income taxes (40%)
244,000
198,000
Net income
£ 366,000
£ 297,000
aDepreciation charges on the plant and equipment of £100,000 and £102,500 for fiscal
years ended March 31, 2021 and 2022, respectively, are included in cost of goods sold.
Instructions
a. Compute the following items for Bradburn plc.
1. Current ratio for fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
2. Acid-test (quick) ratio for fiscal years 2021 and 2022.
3. Inventory turnover for fiscal year 2022.
4. Return on assets for fiscal years 2021 and 2022. (Assume total assets were
£1,688,500 at 3/31/20.)
5. Percentage change in sales, cost of goods sold, gross margin, and net income after
taxes from fiscal year 2021 to 2022.
b. Identify and explain what other financial reports and/or financial analyses might be
helpful to the commercial loan officer of Hibernia Bank in evaluating Daniel Brown’s
request for a time extension on Bradburn’s notes.
c. Assume that the percentage changes experienced in fiscal year 2022 as compared with
fiscal year 2021 for sales, cost of goods sold, and expenses will be repeated in each of the
next 2 years and that the dividend amount will be held constant at the 2022 rate. Is
Bradburn’s desire to finance the plant expansion from internally generated funds
realistic? Discuss.
d. Should Hibernia Bank grant the extension on Bradburn’s notes considering Daniel
Brown’s statement about financing the plant expansion through internally generated
funds? Discuss.
*P24.4 (LO 5) (Horizontal and Vertical Analysis) Presented below are comparative
statements of financial position for Ozturk Ltd.
Ozturk Ltd.
Comparative Statements of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022 and 2021
December 31
2022
2021

--- Page 2287 ---
Ozturk Ltd.
Comparative Statements of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022 and 2021
Assets
Fixed assets
2,585,000
1,950,000
Accumulated depreciation
(1,000,000)
(750,000)
Prepaid expenses
25,000
25,000
Inventories
1,060,000
980,000
Accounts receivable (net)
220,000
155,000
Short-term investments
270,000
150,000
Cash
180,000
275,000
3,340,000
2,785,000
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital—ordinary
2,100,000
1,770,000
Retained earnings
570,000
550,000
Bonds payable
450,000
190,000
Accrued expenses
170,000
200,000
Accounts payable
50,000
75,000
3,340,000
2,785,000
Instructions
(Round to two decimal places.)
a. Prepare a comparative statement of financial position of Ozturk Ltd. showing each
item’s percentage of the total assets or total equity and liabilities.
b. Prepare a comparative statement of financial position of Ozturk Ltd. showing the
Turkish lira change and the percent change for each item.
c. Of what value is the additional information provided in part (a)?
d. Of what value is the additional information provided in part (b)?
*P24.5 (LO 5) 
 (Dividend Policy Analysis) Matheny AG went public 3 years ago.
The board of directors will be meeting shortly after the end of the year to decide on a
dividend policy. In the past, growth has been financed primarily through the retention of
earnings. No share or cash dividend has ever been declared. Presented below is a brief
financial summary of Matheny AG operations (euros in thousands).
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
Sales revenue
€20,000 €16,000 €14,000 €6,000 €4,000
Net income
2,400
1,400
800
700
250
Average total assets
22,000
19,000
11,500
4,200
3,000
Current assets
8,000
6,000
3,000
1,200
1,000

--- Page 2288 ---
Working capital
3,600
3,200
1,200
500
400
Ordinary shares:
Number of shares outstanding (in thousands)
2,000
2,000
2,000
20
20
Average market price
€9
€6
€4
—
—
Instructions
a. Suggest factors to be considered by the board of directors in establishing a dividend
policy.
b. Compute the return on assets, profit margin on sales, earnings per share, price-earnings
ratio, and current ratio for each of the 5 years for Matheny AG.
c. Comment on the appropriateness of declaring a cash dividend of €0.20 per share at this
time, using the ratios computed in part (b) as a major factor in your analysis.
Concepts for Analysis
CA24.1 (LO 1) (General Disclosures; Inventories; Property, Plant, and
Equipment) Koch Corporation is in the process of preparing its annual financial statements
for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2022. The company manufactures plastic, glass, and paper
containers for food and drink manufacturers and distributors.
Koch Corporation maintains separate control accounts for its raw materials, work in process,
and finished goods inventories for each of the three types of containers. The inventories are
valued at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value.
The company’s property, plant, and equipment are classified in the following major
categories: land, office buildings, furniture and fixtures, manufacturing facilities,
manufacturing equipment, and leasehold improvements. All fixed assets are carried at cost.
The depreciation methods employed depend on the type of asset (its classification) and when
it was acquired.
Koch Corporation plans to present the inventory and fixed asset amounts in its April 30,
2022, statement of financial position as shown below.
Inventories
$4,814,200
Property, plant, and equipment (net of depreciation)
6,310,000
Instructions
What information regarding inventories and property, plant, and equipment must be
disclosed by Koch Corporation in the audited financial statements issued to shareholders,
either in the body or the notes, for the 2021–2022 fiscal year?
CA24.2 (LO 1, 2) (Disclosures Required in Various Situations) Ace SA produces
electronic components for sale to manufacturers of radios, television sets, and digital sound
systems. In connection with her examination of Ace’s financial statements for the year ended
December 31, 2022, Gloria Rodd completed field work 2 weeks ago. Ms. Rodd now is
evaluating the significance of the following items prior to preparing her auditor’s report.
Except as noted, none of these items have been disclosed in the financial statements or
notes.

--- Page 2289 ---
Item 1: A 10-year loan agreement, which the company entered into 3 years ago, provides that
dividend payments may not exceed net income earned after taxes subsequent to the date of
the agreement. The balance of retained earnings at the date of the loan agreement was
€420,000. From that date through December 31, 2022, net income after taxes has totaled
€570,000 and cash dividends have totaled €320,000. On the basis of these data, the staff
auditor assigned to this review concluded that there was no retained earnings restriction at
December 31, 2022.
Item 2: Recently, Ace interrupted its policy of paying cash dividends quarterly to its
shareholders. Dividends were paid regularly through 2021, discontinued for all of 2022 to
finance purchase of equipment for the company’s new plant, and resumed in the first quarter
of 2023. In the annual report, dividend policy is to be discussed in the president’s letter to
shareholders.
Item 3: A major electronics firm has introduced a line of products that will compete directly
with Ace’s primary line, now being produced in the specially designed new plant. Because of
manufacturing innovations, the competitor’s line will be of comparable quality but priced
50% below Ace’s line. The competitor announced its new line during the week following
completion of field work (but before the financial statement authorization date). Ms. Rodd
read the announcement in the newspaper and discussed the situation by telephone with Ace
executives. Ace will meet the lower prices that are high enough to cover variable
manufacturing and selling expenses but will permit recovery of only a portion of fixed costs.
Item 4: The company’s new manufacturing plant building, which cost €2,400,000 and has
an estimated life of 25 years, is leased from Wichita National Bank at an annual rental of
€600,000. The company is obligated to pay property taxes, insurance, and maintenance. At
the conclusion of its 10-year non-cancelable lease, the company has the option of purchasing
the property for €1. In Ace’s income statement, the rental payment is reported on a separate
line.
Instructions
For each of the items, discuss any additional disclosures in the financial statements and
notes that the auditor should recommend to her client. (The cumulative effect of the four
items should not be considered.)
CA24.3 (LO 1) (Disclosures, Conditional and Contingent Liabilities) Presented
below are three independent situations.
Situation 1: A company offers a one-year warranty for the product that it manufactures. A
history of warranty claims has been compiled, and the probable amounts of claims related to
sales for a given period can be determined.
Situation 2: Subsequent to the date of a set of financial statements but prior to the
authorization of issuance of the financial statements, a company enters into a contract that
will probably result in a significant loss to the company. The amount of the loss can be
reasonably estimated.
Situation 3: A company has adopted a policy of recording self-insurance for any possible
losses resulting from injury to others by the company’s vehicles. The premium for an
insurance policy for the same risk from an independent insurance company would have an
annual cost of £4,000. During the period covered by the financial statements, there were no
accidents involving the company’s vehicles that resulted in injury to others.

--- Page 2290 ---
Instructions
Discuss the accrual or type of disclosure necessary (if any) and the reason(s) why such
disclosure is appropriate for each of the three independent sets of facts above.
CA24.4 (LO 2) 
 (Subsequent Events) At December 31, 2021, Coburn plc has
assets of £10,000,000, liabilities of £6,000,000, share capital of £2,000,000 (representing
2,000,000 ordinary shares at £1 par), and retained earnings of £2,000,000. Net sales for the
year 2021 were £18,000,000, and net income was £800,000. You are making a review of
subsequent events on February 13, 2022, and you find the following.
1. On February 3, 2022, one of Coburn’s customers declared bankruptcy. At December 31,
2021, this company owed Coburn £300,000, of which £60,000 was paid in January
2022.
2. On January 18, 2022, one of the three major plants of the client burned.
3. On January 23, 2022, a strike was called at one of Coburn’s largest plants, which halted
30% of its production. As of today (February 13), the strike has not been settled.
4. A major electronics enterprise has introduced a line of products that would compete
directly with Coburn’s primary line, now being produced in a specially designed new
plant. Because of manufacturing innovations, the competitor has been able to achieve
quality similar to that of Coburn’s products but at a price 50% lower. Coburn officials
say they will meet the lower prices, which are high enough to cover variable
manufacturing and selling costs but which permit recovery of only a portion of fixed
costs.
5. Merchandise traded in the open market was recorded in the company’s records at £1.40
per unit on December 31, 2021. This price prevailed for 2 weeks, after release of an
official market report that predicted vastly increased supplies; however, no purchases
were made at £1.40. The price throughout the preceding year had been about £2, which
had been the level experienced over several years. On January 18, 2022, the price
returned to £2, after public disclosure of an error in the official calculations of the prior
December correction of which destroyed the expectations of excessive supplies.
Inventory at December 31, 2021, was on a lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value basis.
6. On February 1, 2022, the board of directors adopted a resolution accepting the offer of
an investment banker to guarantee the marketing of £1,200,000 of preference shares.
Instructions
State in each case how the 2021 financial statements would be affected, if at all.
CA24.5 (LO 2) 
 (Segment Reporting) You are compiling the consolidated
financial statements for Winsor Corporation International (WCI). The corporation’s
accountant, Anthony Reese, has provided you with the following segment information.
Note 7: Major Segments of Business
WCI conducts funeral service and cemetery operations in the United States and Canada.
Substantially all revenues of WCI’s major segments of business are from unaffiliated
customers. Segment information for fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020 follows (amounts in
thousands).

--- Page 2291 ---
Funeral
Floral
Cemetery
Real
Estate
Dried
Whey Limousine Consolidated
Revenues
2022
$302,000 $10,000 $ 73,000
$ 2,000 $7,000
$12,000
$406,000
2021
245,000
6,000
61,000
4,000
4,000
4,000
324,000
2020
208,000
3,000
42,000
3,000
1,000
3,000
260,000
Operating Income
2022
74,000
1,500
18,000 (36,000)
500
2,000
60,000
2021
64,000
200
12,000 (28,000)
200
400
48,800
2020
54,000
150
6,000 (21,000)
100
350
39,600
Capital
Expenditures
2022
26,000
1,000
9,000
400
300
1,000
37,700
2021
28,000
2,000
60,000
1,500
100
700
92,300
2020
14,000
25
8,000
600
25
50
22,700
Depreciation and
Amortization
2022
13,000
100
2,400
1,400
100
200
17,200
2021
10,000
50
1,400
700
50
100
12,300
2020
8,000
25
1,000
600
25
50
9,700
Identifiable Assets
2022
334,000
1,500
162,000
114,000
500
8,000
620,000
2021
322,000
1,000
144,000
52,000
1,000
6,000
526,000
2020
223,000
500
78,000
34,000
500
3,500
339,500
Instructions
Determine which of the segments must be reported separately and which can be combined
under the category “Other.” Then, write a one-page memo to the company’s accountant,
Anthony Reese, explaining the following.
a. Which segments must be reported separately and Which segments can be combined.
b. Which criteria you used to determine reportable segments.
c. Which major items must be disclosed for each.
CA24.6 (LO 2) (Interim Reporting) Sino Group, a publicly traded company, is preparing
the interim financial data which it will issue to its shareholders at the end of the first quarter
of the 2021–2022 fiscal year. Sino’s financial accounting department has compiled the
following summarized revenue and expense data for the first quarter of the year.
Sales revenue
¥60,000,000
Cost of goods sold
36,000,000

--- Page 2292 ---
Variable selling expenses
1,000,000
Fixed selling expenses
3,000,000
Included in the fixed selling expenses was the single lump-sum payment of ¥2,000,000 for
television advertisements for the entire year.
Instructions
a. Sino Group must issue its quarterly financial statements in accordance with IFRS
regarding interim financial reporting.
1. Explain whether Sino should report its operating results for the quarter as if the
quarter were a separate reporting period in and of itself, or as if the quarter were an
integral part of the annual reporting period.
2. State how the sales revenue, cost of goods sold, and fixed selling expenses would be
reflected in Sino Group’s quarterly report prepared for the first quarter of the 2021–
2022 fiscal year. Briefly justify your presentation.
b. What financial information, as a minimum, must Sino Group disclose to its
shareholders in its quarterly reports?
CA24.7 (LO 2) 
 (Treatment of Various Interim Reporting Situations) The
following are six independent cases on how accounting facts might be reported on an
individual company’s interim financial reports.
Instructions
For each of these cases, state whether the method proposed for interim reporting would be
acceptable under IFRS. Support each answer with a brief explanation.
a. J. D. Long Company takes a physical inventory at year-end for annual financial
statement purposes. Inventory and cost of sales reported in the interim quarterly
statements are based on estimated gross profit rates because a physical inventory would
result in a cessation of operations. Long Company does have reliable perpetual inventory
records.
b. Rockford Company is planning to report one-fourth of its pension expense each quarter.
c. Republic Company wrote inventory down to reflect lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value
in the first quarter. At year-end, the net realizable value exceeds the original acquisition
cost of this inventory. Consequently, management plans to write the inventory back up
to its original cost as a year-end adjustment.
d. Gansner Company realized a large gain on the sale of investments at the beginning of
the second quarter. The company wants to report one-third of the gain in each of the
remaining quarters.
e. Fredonia Company has estimated its annual audit fee. It plans to pro rate this expense
equally over all four quarters.
f. LaBrava Company was reasonably certain it would have an employee strike in the third
quarter. As a result, it shipped heavily during the second quarter but plans to defer the
recognition of the sales in excess of the normal sales volume. The deferred sales will be
recognized as sales in the third quarter when the strike is in progress. LaBrava Company

--- Page 2293 ---
management thinks this is more representative of normal second- and third-quarter
operations.
CA24.8 (LO 4) 
 (Financial Forecasts) An article in Barron’s noted the following.
“Okay. Last fall, someone with a long memory and an even longer arm reached into that
bureau drawer and came out with a moldy cheese sandwich and the equally moldy notion of
corporate forecasts. However, the forecast proposal was dusted off, polished up and found
quite serviceable. The U.S. SEC, indeed, lost no time in running it up the old flagpole—but no
one was very eager to salute. Even after some of the more objectionable features—
compulsory corrections and detailed explanations of why the estimates went awry—were
peeled off the original proposal.
Seemingly, despite the Commission’s smiles and sweet talk, those craven corporations were
still afraid that an honest mistake would lead them down the primrose path to consent
decrees and class action suits. To lay to rest such qualms, the Commission last week
approved a “Safe Harbor” rule that, providing the forecasts were made on a reasonable basis
and in good faith, protected corporations from litigation should the projections prove wide of
the mark (as only about 99% are apt to do).”
Instructions
a. What are the arguments for preparing profit forecasts?
b. What is the purpose of the “safe harbor” rule?
c. Why are companies concerned about presenting profit forecasts?
CA24.9 (LO 1) 
 (Disclosure of Estimates) Nancy Tercek, the financial vice
president, and Margaret Lilly, the controller, of Romine Manufacturing Company are
reviewing the financial ratios of the company for the years 2022 and 2023. Tercek notes that
the profit margin on sales has increased from 6% to 12%, a hefty gain for the 2-year period.
She is in the process of issuing a media release that emphasizes the efficiency of Romine
Manufacturing in controlling costs. Margaret Lilly knows that the difference in ratios is due
primarily to an earlier company decision to reduce the estimates of warranty and bad debt
expense for 2023. Lilly, who is unsure of her supervisor’s motives, hesitates to suggest to
Tercek that the company’s improvement is unrelated to efficiency in controlling costs. To
complicate matters, the media release is scheduled in a few days.
Instructions
a. What is the ethical dilemma in this situation, if any?
b. Should Lilly, the controller, remain silent? Give reasons.
c. What stakeholders might be affected by Tercek’s media release?
d. Give your opinion on the following statement and cite reasons: “Because Tercek, the vice
president, is most directly responsible for the media release, Lilly has no real
responsibility in this matter.”
CA24.10 (LO 2) 
 (Reporting of Subsequent Events) In June 2022, the board of
directors for McElroy Enterprises authorizes the sale of £10,000,000 of company bonds.
Jennifer Grayson, treasurer for McElroy Enterprises, is concerned about the date when the

--- Page 2294 ---
bonds are issued. The company really needs the cash, but she is worried that if the bonds are
issued before the company’s year-end (December 31, 2022) the additional liability will have
an adverse effect on a number of important ratios. In July, she explains to company
president William McElroy that if they delay issuing the bonds until after December 31, the
bonds will not affect the ratios until December 31, 2023. They will have to report the
issuance as a subsequent event, which requires only footnote disclosure. Grayson expects
that with expected improved financial performance in 2023, the ratios should be better.
Instructions
a. What are the ethical issues involved?
b. Should McElroy agree to the delay?
*CA24.11 (LO 5) 
 (Effect of Transactions on Financial Statements and
Ratios) The transactions listed below relate to Wainwright Inc. You are to assume that on
the date on which each of the transactions occurred, the company’s accounts showed only
ordinary shares ($100 par) outstanding, a current ratio of 2.7:1, and a substantial net income
for the year to date (before giving effect to the transaction concerned). On that date, the book
value per share was $151.53.
Each numbered transaction is to be considered completely independent of the others, and its
related answer should be based on the effect(s) of that transaction alone. Assume that all
numbered transactions occurred during 2022 and that the amount involved in each case is
sufficiently material to distort reported net income if improperly included in the
determination of net income. Assume further that each transaction was recorded in
accordance with IFRS and, where applicable, in conformity with the all-inclusive concept of
the income statement.
For each of the numbered transactions you are to decide whether it:
a. Increased the company’s 2022 net income.
b. Decreased the company’s 2022 net income.
c. Increased the company’s total retained earnings directly (i.e., not via net income).
d. Decreased the company’s total retained earnings directly.
e. Increased the company’s current ratio.
f. Decreased the company’s current ratio.
g. Increased each shareholder’s proportionate share of total equity.
h. Decreased each shareholder’s proportionate share of total equity.
i. Increased each shareholder’s equity per share (book value).
j. Decreased each shareholder’s equity per share (book value).
k. Had none of the these effects.
Instructions
For each transaction listed below, select from options a-k above the answer which best
corresponds to each of the 9 choices. There can be more than one answer for each numbered
transaction.

--- Page 2295 ---
Transactions
_____
1. In January, the board directed the write-off of certain patent rights that had
suddenly and unexpectedly become worthless.
_____
2. The company sold at a profit land and a building that had been idle for some
time. Under the terms of the sale, the company received a portion of the sales
price in cash immediately, the balance maturing at 6-month intervals.
_____
3. Treasury shares originally repurchased and carried at $127 per share were sold
for cash at $153 per share.
_____
4. The company wrote off all of the unamortized discount (and issue costs)
applicable to bonds that it refinanced in 2022.
_____
5. The company called in all its outstanding ordinary shares and exchanged them
for new shares on a 2-for-1 basis, reducing the par value at the same time to
$50 per share.
_____
6. The company paid a cash dividend that had been recorded in the accounts at
time of declaration.
_____
7. Litigation involving Wainwright Inc. as defendant was settled in the company’s
favor, with the plaintiff paying all court costs and legal fees. In 2019, the
company had appropriately established a special contingency for this court
action. (Indicate the effect of reversing the contingency only.)
_____
8. The corporation received from its insurance company a check for the proceeds
of a policy against theft of trucks. No entries concerning the theft had been
made previously, and the proceeds reduce but do not completely cover the loss.
_____
9. Treasury shares, which had been repurchased at and carried at $127 per share,
were issued as a share dividend. In connection with this distribution, the board
of directors of Wainwright Inc. had authorized a transfer from retained
earnings to permanent share capital of an amount equal to the aggregate
market price ($153 per share) of the shares issued. No entries relating to this
dividend had been made previously.
Using Your Judgment

--- Page 2296 ---
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
As stated in the chapter, notes to the financial statements are the means of explaining the
items presented in the main body of the statements. Common note disclosures relate to such
items as accounting policies, segmented information, and interim reporting. The financial
statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s complete annual
report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following
questions.
a. What specific items does M&S discuss in its Note 1—Summary of Significant
Accounting Policies? (List the headings only.)
b. For what segments did M&S report segmented information? Which segment is the
largest? Who is M&S’s largest customer?
c. What interim information was reported by M&S?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B
and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial
statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. 
1. What specific items does Puma discuss in its Note 2—Significant
Consolidation, Accounting, and Valuation Principles? (Prepare a list of the
headings only.)
2. What specific items does adidas discuss in its Note 2—Our Summary of
Significant Accounting Policies? (Prepare a list of the headings only.)
b. For what lines of business or segments do adidas and Puma present segmented
information?
c. Note and comment on the similarities and differences between the auditors’ reports
submitted by the independent auditors of adidas and Puma for the year 2018.
*Financial Statement Analysis Case
RNA manufactures a variety of consumer products. The company’s founders have run the
company for 30 years and are now interested in retiring. Consequently, they are seeking a
purchaser who will continue its operations. A group of investors, Morgan SA, is looking into
the acquisition of RNA. To evaluate RNA’s financial stability and operating efficiency,
Morgan SA has requested that RNA provide its latest financial statements and selected
financial ratios. RNA provides the following summary.

--- Page 2297 ---
RNA
Income Statement
For the Year Ended November 30, 2022
(in thousands)
Sales (net)
€30,500
Interest income
500
Total revenue
31,000
Costs and expenses
Cost of goods sold
17,600
Selling and administrative expenses
3,550
Depreciation and amortization expense
1,890
Interest expense
900
Total costs and expenses
23,940
Income before taxes
7,060
Income taxes
2,800
Net income
€ 4,260
RNA
Statement of Financial Position
As of November 30
(in thousands)
2022
2021
Property, plant, & equipment (net)
€ 7,100
€ 7,000
Inventory
6,000
5,400
Accounts receivable (net)
3,200
2,900
Investments (at cost)
300
200
Cash
400
500
Total current assets
9,900
9,000
Total assets
€17,000 € 16,000
Share capital—ordinary (€1 par value) € 2,700
€ 2,700
Share premium—ordinary
1,000
1,000
Retained earnings
5,000
4,900
Total equity
8,700
8,600
Long-term debt
2,000
1,800
Accrued expenses
1,700
1,400
Income taxes payable
900
800
Accounts payable
3,700
3,400
Total current liabilities
6,300
5,600
Total equity and liabilities
€17,000 € 16,000

--- Page 2298 ---
Selected Financial Ratios
Selected Financial Ratios
RNA
Current
Industry
Average
2021 2020
Current ratio
1.61
1.62
1.63
Acid-test ratio
.64
.63
.68
Times interest earned
8.55
8.50
8.45
Profit margin on sales 13.2% 12.1%
13.0%
Asset turnover
1.84
1.83
1.84
Inventory turnover
3.17
3.21
3.18
Instructions
a. Calculate a new set of ratios for fiscal year 2022 for RNA based on the financial
statements presented.
b. Explain the analytical use of each of the six ratios presented, describing what the
investors can learn about RNA’s financial stability and operating efficiency.
c. Identify two limitations of ratio analysis.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Savannah plc manufactures and sells a single product. Unit sales for each of the four
quarters of 2022 are projected as follows.
Quarter
Units
First
80,000
Second
150,000
Third
550,000
Fourth
120,000
Annual Total 900,000
Savannah incurs variable manufacturing costs of £0.40 per unit and variable non-
manufacturing costs of £0.35 per unit. Savannah will incur fixed manufacturing costs of
£720,000 and fixed non-manufacturing costs of £1,080,000. Savannah will sell its product
for £4.00 per unit.
Accounting
Determine the amount of net income Savannah will report in each of the four quarters of
2022, assuming actual sales are as projected and employing (a) the integral approach to
interim financial reporting and (b) the discrete approach to interim financial reporting.
Ignore income taxes.
Analysis
Compute Savannah’s profit margin on sales for each of the four quarters of 2022. What
effect does employing the integral approach instead of the discrete approach have on the

--- Page 2299 ---
degree to which Savannah’s profit margin on sales varies from quarter to quarter?
Principles
Should Savannah implement the integral or discrete approach under IFRS? Explain the
conceptual rationale behind the integral approach to interim financial reporting.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] “Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2001), par. 21.
[2] International Financial Reporting Standard for Small and Medium-sized Entities (IFRS
for SMEs) (London, U.K.: IASB, 2009).
[3] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2007).
[4] International Accounting Standard 24, Related Party Disclosures (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2009), par. 9.
[5] International Accounting Standard 24, Related Party Disclosures (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2009), par. 17.
[6] International Accounting Standard 10, Events after the Reporting Period (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2007).
[7] International Accounting Standard 10, Events after the Reporting Period (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2007), par. 22.
[8] International Financial Reporting Standard 8, Operating Segments (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2006), par. BC15.
[9] International Financial Reporting Standard 8, Operating Segments (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2006), par. 19.
[10] International Accounting Standard 34, Interim Financial Reporting (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[11] International Accounting Standard 34, Interim Financial Reporting (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras. B12–B19.
[12] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. 1.
[13] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. 10.
[14] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. 22.
[15] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. BC 22B.
[16] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), App. C and D.

--- Page 2300 ---
[17] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), App. B–E.
[18] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), paras. D5–D8 and BC41–BC47.
[19] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. 19.
[20] International Financial Reporting Standard 1, First-time Adoption of International
Financial Reporting Standards (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003), par. 24.
Research Case
As part of the year-end audit, you are discussing the disclosure checklist with your client. The
checklist identifies the items that must be disclosed in a set of IFRS financial statements.
The client is surprised by the disclosure item related to accounting policies. Specifically,
since the audit report will attest to the statements being prepared in accordance with IFRS,
the client questions the accounting policy checklist item. The client has asked you to conduct
some research to verify the accounting policy disclosures.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS
access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in
your Internet browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. In general, what should disclosures of accounting policies encompass?
b. List some examples of the most commonly required disclosures.
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7
Compare the disclosure requirements under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS disclosure requirements are similar in many regards. The IFRS
requirements addressing various disclosure issues are IAS 24 (“Related Party Disclosures”),
disclosure and recognition of post-statement of financial position events in IAS 10 (“Events
after the Balance Sheet Date”), segment reporting IFRS provisions in IFRS 8 (“Operating
Segments”), and interim reporting requirements in IAS 34 (“Interim Financial Reporting”).
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
disclosures.
Similarities
U.S. GAAP and IFRS have similar standards on post-statement of financial position
(subsequent) events. That is, under both sets of standards, events that occurred after the
statement of financial position date, and which provide additional evidence of conditions

--- Page 2301 ---
that existed at the statement of financial position date, are recognized in the financial
statements.
Like U.S. GAAP, IFRS requires that for transactions with related parties, companies
disclose the amounts involved in a transaction; the amount, terms, and nature of the
outstanding balances; and any doubtful amounts related to those outstanding balances
for each major category of related parties.
Following the issuance of IFRS 8, “Operating Segments,” the segment reporting
requirements under U.S. GAAP and IFRS are very similar. That is, both standards use
the management approach to identify reportable segments, and similar segment
disclosures are required.
Neither U.S. GAAP nor IFRS require interim reports. Rather, the U.S. SEC and securities
exchanges outside the United States establish the rules. In the United States, interim
reports generally are provided on a quarterly basis; outside the United States, six-month
interim reports are common.
Differences
Due to the narrower range of judgments allowed in more rules-based U.S. GAAP, note
disclosures generally are less expansive under U.S. GAAP than under IFRS.
In the United States, there is a preference for one set of accepted accounting principles
except in unusual situations. The FASB issues alternative guidance (within U.S. GAAP)
for privately held companies with input from the Private Company Council. As indicated
in the chapter, the IASB has developed a separate set of standards for small- and
medium-sized entities (SMEs), which are designed to meet the needs of privately held
companies.
As indicated in the About the Numbers section below, U.S. GAAP uses the date when
financial statements are “issued” to determine the reporting of subsequent events.
Subsequent (or post-statement of financial position) events under IFRS are evaluated
through the date that financial instruments are “authorized for issue.” Also, for share
dividends and splits in the subsequent period, U.S. GAAP adjusts, but IFRS does not.
U.S. GAAP has specific requirements to disclose the name of a related party; under IFRS,
there is no specific requirement to disclose the name of the related party.
Under U.S. GAAP, interim reports are prepared on an integral basis; IFRS generally
follows the discrete approach.
About the Numbers
Post-Balance-Sheet Events (Subsequent Events)
Under U.S. GAAP (as under IFRS), notes to the financial statements should explain any
significant financial events that took place after the formal balance sheet (statement of
financial position) date, but before the statement is issued. These events are referred to as
post-balance-sheet events or just plain subsequent events. The following illustration
shows a time diagram of the subsequent events period under U.S. GAAP.

--- Page 2302 ---
A period of several weeks and sometimes months may elapse after the end of the fiscal year
but before the company issues financial statements. Various activities involved in closing the
books for the period and issuing the statements take time: counting and pricing the
inventory, reconciling subsidiary ledgers with controlling accounts, preparing necessary
adjusting entries, ensuring that all transactions for the period have been entered, obtaining
an audit of the financial statements by independent public accountants, and printing the
annual report. During the period between the balance sheet date and its distribution to
shareholders and creditors, important transactions or other events may occur that materially
affect the company’s financial position or operating situation.
Many who read a balance sheet believe the balance sheet condition is constant, and they
project it into the future. However, readers must be told if the company has experienced a
significant change—e.g., sold one of its plants, acquired a subsidiary, suffered extraordinary
losses, settled significant litigation, or experienced any other important event in the post-
balance-sheet period. Without an explanation in a note, the reader might be misled and draw
inappropriate conclusions.
Relative to IFRS, which stipulates that the subsequent-event period should end
on the date the statements are authorized, the subsequent-event period is longer under
U.S. GAAP. Therefore, financial statement users generally receive more information about
subsequent events. However, U.S. GAAP and IFRS define recognized and non-recognized
subsequent events similarly. The following subsequent events disclosure is excerpted from
the annual report of Commercial Metals Company.
Commercial Metals Company
NOTE 22. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS (August 31 Fiscal Year End)
On October 7, 2021, The Company announced its decision to exit the business in CMCS by
way of sale and/or closure. During 2021, the Company made operational improvements in
the business but not to a level which would restore profitability for the long run.
Additionally, delayed entry in the European Union, cyclical demand for tubular products,
unsustainable losses and increased demand for capital resources resulted in the decision to
exit the business. The operation will service any existing customer commitments and the
Company expects to wind down operations and liquidate inventory over the next several
months. In connection with this decision, the Company expects to incur severance and
other closure costs between $25 million and $40 million in fiscal 2022.
Many subsequent events or developments do not require adjustment of or disclosure in the
financial statements. Typically, these are non-accounting events or conditions that
management normally reports by other means. These events include legislation, product

--- Page 2303 ---
changes, management changes, strikes, unionization, marketing agreements, and loss of
important customers.
Summary Observations
Because U.S. GAAP and IFRS are quite similar in their disclosure provisions, we provide
some observations on the application of IFRS by foreign companies listing securities in the
United States. Recently, the staff of the U.S. SEC reviewed the financial statements filed with
the SEC by 100 foreign issuers, prepared for the first time using IFRS. The staff did not make
any statements regarding the overall quality of the reports but did identify areas where
additional questions might be asked. Here are some of the items that warranted staff
comment:
1. Revenue recognition, especially where a company provided generic policy disclosure but
did not provide disclosure specific to its circumstances.
2. Intangible assets and goodwill, including the factors that led a company to recognize
them in a business combination.
3. Companies’ policies for identifying and evaluating impairment, the circumstances
resulting in impairment recognition, or the circumstances surrounding impairment
reversals of long-lived assets, including goodwill.
4. Leases, including their terms and the future minimum payments under operating and
financial leases.
5. Contingent liabilities, including their nature and estimated financial effects.
6. The significant terms of financial instruments, including derivatives, their effects on
future cash flow, and the recognition and measurement criteria the company applied in
accounting for financial instruments.
7. Additional issues related to income statement and cash flow statement formats and
related notes.
On the Horizon
Hans Hoogervorst, chair of the IASB, recently noted: “High quality financial information is
the lifeblood of market-based economies. If the blood is of poor quality, then the body shuts
down and the patient dies. It is the same with financial reporting. If investors cannot trust
the numbers, then financial markets stop working. For market-based economies, that is
really bad news. It is an essential public good for market-based economies…. And in the past
10 years, most of the world’s economies—developed and emerging—have embraced IFRSs.”
While the United States has yet to adopt IFRS, there is no question that IFRS and U.S. GAAP
are more converged, relative to 10 years ago. We have provided expanded discussion in the
Global Accounting Insights to help you understand the issues surrounding convergence as
they relate to intermediate accounting. After reading these discussions, you will realize that
IFRS and U.S. GAAP are very similar, with differences in the areas that involve minor
technical points. In other areas, the differences are major; for example, IFRS does not permit
LIFO inventory accounting. Our hope is that the FASB and IASB can continue convergence
efforts, to narrow differences in accounting standards for use by companies around the
world.
GAAP Self-Test Questions

--- Page 2304 ---
1. Which of the following is false?
a. In general, IFRS note disclosures are more expansive compared to U.S. GAAP.
b. U.S. GAAP and IFRS have similar standards on subsequent events.
c. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require interim reports, although the reporting frequency
varies.
d. Segment reporting requirements are very similar under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
2. Which of the following is true?
a. Differential reporting for small- and medium-sized entities is required for all companies
less than a certain size.
b. IFRS SME accounting omits accounting topics not relevant for SMEs, such as earnings
per share, and interim and segment reporting.
c. U.S. GAAP provides no accounting alternatives for private companies.
d. U.S. GAAP requires significantly more disclosures, since more items are subject to
judgment.
3. Subsequent events are reviewed through which date under U.S. GAAP?
a. Balance sheet (statement of financial position) date.
b. Authorization date of the financial statements.
c. Date of independent auditor’s opinion.
d. Financial statement issue date.
4. Under IFRS, share dividends declared after the statement of financial position date but
before the end of the subsequent events period are:
a. accounted for similarly to errors as a prior period adjustment.
b. adjusted subsequent events, because they are paid from prior year earnings.
c. not adjusted in the current year’s financial statements.
d. recognized on a prospective basis from the date of declaration.
5. Interim reporting under U.S. GAAP:
a. is prepared using the discrete approach.
b. is prepared using an integral approach.
c. requires a complete set of financial statements for each interim period.
d. permits companies to omit disclosure of material events subsequent to the interim
reporting date.
GAAP Concepts and Application

--- Page 2305 ---
GAAP24.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between disclosure rules
under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
GAAP24.2 Bill Novak is working on an audit of a U.S. GAAP client. In his review of the
client’s interim reports, he notes that the reports are prepared on an integral basis. That is,
each interim report is viewed as a part of the annual period. Is this acceptable under U.S.
GAAP? If so, explain how that treatment could affect comparisons to an IFRS company.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. b 3. d 4. d 5. b
Notes
1 “Making Materiality Judgments,” IFRS Practice Statement 2 (London, U.K.: IASB,
December 2017). Practice statements are not IFRS. Accordingly, entities are not required
to comply with the framework for the preparation and presentation of management
commentary as a condition for asserting compliance with IFRS.
2 The IASB is evaluating disclosure issues such as those related to management
commentary. However, as noted by one standard-setter, the usefulness of expanded
required disclosure also depends on users’ ability to distinguish between disclosed versus
recognized items in financial statements. Research to date is inconclusive on this matter.
See Katherine Schipper, “Required Disclosures in Financial Reports,” Presidential Address
to the American Accounting Association Annual Meeting (San Francisco, Calif.: August
2005); and B. Bratten, P. Choudhary, and K. Schipper, “Evidence that Market Participants
Assess Recognized and Disclosed Items Similarly When Reliability Is Not an Issue,” The
Accounting Review (July 2013).
3 Examples of related-party transactions include transactions between (a) a parent company
and its subsidiaries, (b) subsidiaries of a common parent, (c) a company and trusts for the
benefit of employees (controlled or managed by the enterprise), and (d) a company and its
principal owners, management, or members of immediate families, and affiliates. [4]
4 International Standard on Auditing 240, “The Auditor’s Responsibilities Related to Fraud
in an Audit of Financial Statements,” Handbook of International Quality Control,
Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Other Related Services Pronouncements (New
York: International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), April 2010). An expanded
discussion of fraud appears later in this chapter. Requirements for company audits vary
according to the jurisdiction and market listing. Audits of public international companies
outside the United States comply with the international auditing standards issued by the
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB).
5 In many jurisdictions, management is required to issue its financial statements to a
supervisory board (made up solely of non-executives) for approval. In such cases, the
financial statements are authorized for issue—the end of the subsequent events period—
when the management authorizes them for issue to the supervisory board. In other
jurisdictions, companies are required to submit the financial statements to their
shareholders for approval after the financial statements have been made public. In such
cases, the subsequent events period ends on the date of issue, not the date when
shareholders approve the financial statements. [6]

--- Page 2306 ---
6 The effects from natural disasters, such as the eruption of the Icelandic volcano, which
occurred after the year-end for companies with March fiscal years, require disclosure in
order to keep the statements from being misleading. Some companies may have to
consider whether these disasters affect their ability to continue as going concerns.
7 The estimated annual effective tax rate should reflect anticipated tax credits, foreign tax
rates, percentage depletion, capital gains rates, and other available tax-planning
alternatives.
8 These are referred to as review engagements, which are less extensive than an audit. See
International Standards on Review Engagements (ISRE) 2410, “Review of Interim
Financial Information Performed by the Independent Auditor of the Entity,” Handbook of
International Quality Control, Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Other Related
Services Pronouncements (April 2010).
9 This auditor’s report and the following discussion follow international auditing standards.
See International Standard on Auditing 700, “Forming an Opinion and Reporting on
Financial Statements” and International Standard on Auditing 705, “Modifications to the
Opinion in the Independent Auditor’s Report,” Handbook of International Quality
Control, Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Other Related Services Pronouncements
(New York: International Federation of Accountants (IFAC), April 2010). They are also
similar to the specifications for U.S. auditors contained in “Reports on Audited Financial
Statements,” Statement on Auditing Standards No. 58 (New York: AICPA, 1988). U.S.
standards differ due to the required audit opinion on the company’s internal controls, as
required by the U.S. SEC.
10 International Standards on Auditing 701, Communicating Key Audit Matters in the
Independent Auditor’s Report (Geneva, Switzerland: The International Auditing and
Assurance Standards Board, International Federation of Accountants, January 2015), para
8.
11“Management Commentary: A Framework for Presentation,” IFRS Practice Statement,
IASB (December 2010). This is not an IFRS. Accordingly, it is not a requirement for an
entity to comply with the framework for the preparation and presentation of management
commentary as a condition for asserting compliance with IFRS.
12 Some areas in which companies are using financial information about the future are
equipment lease-versus-buy analysis, analysis of a company’s ability to successfully enter
new markets, and examination of merger and acquisition opportunities. In addition,
companies prepare forecasts and projections for use by third parties in public offering
documents (requiring financial forecasts), tax-oriented investments, and financial
feasibility studies. Use of forward-looking data has been enhanced by the increased
capability of computers to analyze, compare, and manipulate large quantities of data.
13 There is not a specific international standard in this area. In the United States, see
“Financial Forecasts and Projections” and “Guide for Prospective Financial Information,”
Codification of Statements on Standards for Attestation Engagements (New York: AICPA
2006), paras. 3.04 and 3.05.
14 The issue is serious. Over a recent three-year period, eight percent of the companies on
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) were sued because of an alleged lack of financial

--- Page 2307 ---
disclosure. Companies complain that they are subject to lawsuits whenever the share price
drops. And as one executive noted, “You can even be sued if the share price goes up—
because you did not disclose the good news fast enough.”
15 Op cit., par. 1.02.
16 For example, the U.S. SEC Issued “Safe-Harbor Rule for Projections,” Release No. 5993
(Washington: SEC, 1979). The U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995
recognizes that some information that is useful to investors is inherently subject to less
certainty or reliability than other information. By providing safe harbor for forward-
looking statements, this should facilitate access to this information by investors.
17 See www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/33-9002.pdf and C. Twarowski, “Financial Data ‘on
Steroids’,” Washington Post (August 19, 2008), p. D01. See also the XBRL website for
additional information.
18 PricewaterhouseCoopers, The Global Economic Crime Survey: Economic Crime in a
Downturn (2016).
19 “Report of the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting” (Washington,
D.C., 1987), p. 2. Unintentional errors as well as company improprieties (such as tax fraud,
employee embezzlements, and so on) that do not cause the financial statements to be
misleading are excluded from the definition of fraudulent financial reporting.
20 The discussion in this section is based on “Report of the National Commission on
Fraudulent Financial Reporting,” (2004), pp. 23–24. See also “2014 Report to the Nation
on Occupational Fraud and Abuse, Association of Certified Fraud Examiners” for
fraudulent financial reporting causes and consequences.
21 Because the profession believes that the role of the auditor is not well understood outside
the profession, much attention has been focused on the expectation gap. The expectation
gap is the gap between (1) the expectation of financial statement users concerning the
level of assurance they believe the independent auditor provides, and (2) the assurance
that the independent auditor actually does provide under generally accepted auditing
standards.
22 See International Standard on Auditing 240, “The Auditor’s Responsibilities Relating to
Fraud in an Audit of Financial Statements,” Handbook of International Quality Control,
Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Other Related Services Pronouncements (April
2010).
23 Some analysts use other terms to categorize these ratios. For example, coverage ratios are
sometimes referred to as solvency ratios; activity ratios as turnover or efficiency ratios;
and coverage ratios as leverage or capital structure ratios.
24 Richard E. Cheney, “How Dependable Is the Bottom Line?” The Financial Executive
(January 1971), p. 12.
25 See for example, Eugene A. Imhoff, Jr., Robert C. Lipe, and David W. Wright, “Operating
Leases: Impact of Constructive Capitalization,” Accounting Horizons (March 1991).
26 To maintain comparisons in the transition year, companies may present comparative
information in accordance with previous GAAP as well as the comparative information

--- Page 2308 ---
required by IFRS. Companies must (a) label the previous GAAP information prominently
as not being prepared in accordance with IFRS, and (b) disclose the nature of the main
adjustments that would make it comply with IFRS. Companies need not quantify those
adjustments. [14]
27 Other areas subject to the option are (1) business combinations; (2) insurance contracts;
(3) investments in subsidiaries, jointly controlled entities, and associates; (4) designation
of previously recognized financial instruments; (5) financial assets or intangible assets
accounted for as Service Concession Arrangements; and (6) transfers of assets from
customers. [16]
28 Specific implementation guidance for other areas is provided in IFRS 1. [17]
29 In addition, IFRS does not restrict the use of fair value as deemed cost to an entire class of
assets, as is done for revaluation accounting (see discussion in Chapter 11). For example, a
company can use fair value for deemed cost for some buildings and not for others.
However, if a company uses fair value as deemed cost for assets whose fair value is above
cost, it cannot ignore indications that the recoverable amount of other assets may have
fallen below their carrying amount. Thus, an impairment may need to be recorded.
Source: Adapted from “Discussion Forum—Financial Reporting Disclosure,” Feedback Statement (London, U.K.: IASB,
May 2013). See also Amendments to IAS 1 (December 2014) and IAS 7 (January 2016).

--- Page 2309 ---
Appendix A 
Specimen Financial Statements: Marks and Spencer Group plc
Consolidated income statement
 
Notes
52 weeks ended 30 March 2019
52 weeks ended 31 March 2018
Profit before
adjusting items
£m
Adjusting
items £m
Total
£m
Profit before
adjusting
items £m
Adjusting
items £m
Total
£m
Revenue
2, 3
10,377.3
– 10,377.3
10,698.2
– 10,698.2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating
profit
2, 3, 5
601.0
(438.6)
162.4
670.6
(514.1)
156.5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finance
income
6
33.8
–
33.8
24.1
–
24.1
Finance costs
6
(111.6)
–
(111.6)
(113.8)
–
(113.8)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Profit before
tax
4, 5
523.2
(438.6)
84.6
580.9
(514.1)
66.8
Income tax
expense
7
(106.0)
58.7
(47.3)
(125.4)
87.7
(37.7)
Profit for
the year
 
417.2
(379.9)
37.3
455.5
(426.4)
29.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attributable
to:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Owners of the
parent
 
413.4
(379.9)
33.5
452.1
(426.4)
25.7
Non‐
controlling
interests
 
3.8
–
3.8
3.4
–
3.4
 
 
417.2
(379.9)
37.3
455.5
(426.4)
29.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Basic earnings
per share
8
25.4p
 
2.1p
27.8p
 
1.6p
Diluted
earnings per
share
8
25.4p
 
2.1p
27.8p
 
1.6p
Consolidated statement of comprehensive income

--- Page 2310 ---
 
Notes
52 weeks ended 30
March 2019 £m
52 weeks ended 31
March 2018 £m
Profit for the year
 
37.3
29.1
Other comprehensive income:
 
 
 
Items that will not be reclassified to
profit or loss
 
 
 
Remeasurements of retirement benefit
schemes
11
(79.9)
200.9
Tax credit/(charge) on items that will not
be reclassified
 
14.0
(39.0)
 
 
(65.9)
161.9
Items that will be reclassified
subsequently to profit or loss
 
 
 
Foreign currency translation differences
 
 
 
– movements recognised in other
comprehensive income
 
(15.4)
(23.4)
– reclassified and reported in profit and loss
 
–
(36.2)
Revaluation of available for sale asset
 
–
6.9
Cash flow hedges and net investment
hedges
 
 
 
– fair value movements in other
comprehensive income
 
132.0
(208.7)
– reclassified and reported in profit or loss
 
(16.0)
85.0
– amount recognised in inventories
 
–
57.5
Tax (charge)/credit on cash flow hedges and
net investment hedges
 
(19.0)
19.7
 
 
81.6
(99.2)
Other comprehensive income for the year,
net of tax
 
15.7
62.7
Total comprehensive income for the
year
 
53.0
91.8
 
 
 
 
Attributable to:
 
 
 
Owners of the parent
 
49.2
88.4
Non‐controlling interests
 
3.8
3.4
 
 
53.0
91.8
Consolidated statement of financial position

--- Page 2311 ---
 
Notes
As at 30 March
2019 £m
As at 31 March
2018 £m
Assets
 
 
 
Non‐current assets
 
 
 
Intangible assets
14
499.9
599.2
Property, plant and equipment
15
4,028.5
4,393.9
Investment property
 
15.5
15.5
Investment in joint ventures
 
4.0
7.0
Other financial assets
16
9.9
9.9
Retirement benefit asset
11
931.5
970.7
Trade and other receivables
17
200.7
209.0
Derivative financial instruments
21
19.8
27.1
 
 
5,709.8
6,232.3
Current assets
 
 
 
Inventories
 
700.4
781.0
Other financial assets
16
141.8
13.7
Trade and other receivables
17
322.5
308.4
Derivative financial instruments
21
40.3
7.1
Cash and cash equivalents
18
285.4
207.7
 
 
1,490.4
1,317.9
Total assets
 
7,200.2
7,550.2
Liabilities
 
 
 
Current liabilities
 
 
 
Trade and other payables
19
1,461.3
1,405.9
Partnership liability to the Marks & Spencer UK
Pension Scheme
12
71.9
71.9
Borrowings and other financial liabilities
20
513.1
125.6
Derivative financial instruments
21
7.3
73.8
Provisions
22
148.6
98.8
Current tax liabilities
 
26.2
50.0
 
 
2,228.4
1,826.0
Non‐current liabilities
 
 
 
Retirement benefit deficit
11
17.2
22.5
Trade and other payables
19
322.4
333.8
Partnership liability to the Marks & Spencer UK
Pension Scheme
12
200.5
263.6
Borrowings and other financial liabilities
20
1,279.5
1,670.6
Derivative financial instruments
21
2.8
30.7
Provisions
22
250.1
193.1
Deferred tax liabilities
23
218.4
255.7
 
 
2,290.9
2,770.0
Total liabilities
 
4,519.3
4,596.0

--- Page 2312 ---
 
Notes
As at 30 March
2019 £m
As at 31 March
2018 £m
Net assets
 
2,680.9
2,954.2
Equity
 
 
 
Issued share capital
24
406.3
406.2
Share premium account
 
416.9
416.4
Capital redemption reserve
 
2,210.5
2,210.5
Hedging reserves
 
(2.9)
(65.3)
Other reserve
 
(6,542.2)
(6,542.2)
Foreign exchange reserve
 
(44.7)
(29.3)
Retained earnings
 
6,237.1
6,560.4
Total shareholders’ equity
 
2,681.0
2,956.7
Non‐controlling interests in equity
 
(0.1)
(2.5)
Total equity
 
2,680.9
2,954.2
The financial statements were approved by the Board and authorised for issue on 21 May 2019. The financial statements also comprise
notes 1 to 30.
Steve Rowe Chief Executive Officer
Humphrey Singer Chief Finance Officer
Consolidated statement of changes in equity

--- Page 2313 ---
 
Ordinary
share
capital
£m
Share
premium
account
£m
Capital
redemption
reserve £m
Hedging
reserve2
£m
Cost of
hedging
£m
Other
reserve1
£m
Foreign
exchange
reserve
£m
Re
ear
As at 2 April
2017
406.2
416.4
2,210.5
17.3
–
(6,542.2)
30.5
Profit for the year
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Other
comprehensive
(expense)/income:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency
translation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– movements
recognised in
other
comprehensive
income
–
–
–
0.2
–
–
(23.6)
– reclassified and
reported in profit
or loss
–
–
–
–
–
–
(36.2)
Revaluation of
available for sale
asset
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Remeasurements
of retirement
benefit schemes
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Tax charge on
items that will not
be reclassified
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Cash flow hedges
and net
investment hedges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– fair value
movements in
other
comprehensive
income
–
–
–
(211.0)
–
–
–
– reclassified and
reported in profit
or loss
–
–
–
51.0
–
–
–
– amount
recognised in
inventories
–
–
–
57.5
–
–
–
Tax on cash flow
hedges and net
investment hedges
–
–
–
19.7
–
–
–
Other
comprehensive
income/(expense)
–
–
–
(82.6)
–
–
(59.8)

--- Page 2314 ---
 
Ordinary
share
capital
£m
Share
premium
account
£m
Capital
redemption
reserve £m
Hedging
reserve2
£m
Cost of
hedging
£m
Other
reserve1
£m
Foreign
exchange
reserve
£m
Re
ear
Total
comprehensive
income/(expense)
–
–
–
(82.6)
–
–
(59.8)
Transactions with
owners:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividends
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Transactions with
non‐controlling
shareholders
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Shares issued on
exercise of
employee share
options
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Purchase of own
shares held by
employee trusts
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Credit for share‐
based payments
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Deferred tax on
share schemes
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
As at 31 March
2018
406.2
416.4
2,210.5
(65.3)
–
(6,542.2)
(29.3)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at 1 April 2018
406.2
416.4
2,210.5
(65.3)
– (6,542.2)
(29.3)
6
Adjustment on
initial application
of IFRS 9 (note
29)
–
–
–
(10.7)
10.7
–
–
Adjusted
opening
shareholders
equity
406.2
416.4
2,210.5
(76.0)
10.7 (6,542.2)
(29.3)
6
Profit for the year
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Other
comprehensive
(expense)/income:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency
translation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– movements
recognised in
other
comprehensive
income
–
–
–
–
–
–
(15.4)

--- Page 2315 ---
 
Ordinary
share
capital
£m
Share
premium
account
£m
Capital
redemption
reserve £m
Hedging
reserve2
£m
Cost of
hedging
£m
Other
reserve1
£m
Foreign
exchange
reserve
£m
Re
ear
Remeasurements
of retirement
benefit schemes
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Tax credit on
items that will not
be reclassified
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Cash flow hedges
and net
investment hedges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– fair value
movement in
other
comprehensive
income
–
–
–
130.5
1.5
–
–
– reclassified and
reported in profit
or loss
–
–
–
(16.0)
–
–
–
Tax on cash flow
hedges and net
investment hedges
–
–
–
(18.5)
(0.5)
–
–
Other
comprehensive
income/(expense)
–
–
–
96.0
1.0
–
(15.4)
Total
comprehensive
income/(expense)
–
–
–
96.0
1.0
–
(15.4)
Cash flow hedges
recognised in
inventories
–
–
–
(42.7)
–
–
–
Tax on cash flow
hedges recognised
in inventories
–
–
–
8.1
–
–
–
Transactions with
owners:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividends
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
(
Transactions with
non‐controlling
shareholders
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Shares issued on
exercise of
employee share
options
0.1
0.5
–
–
–
–
–
Purchase of own
shares held by
employee trusts
–
–
–
–
–
–
–

--- Page 2316 ---
 
Ordinary
share
capital
£m
Share
premium
account
£m
Capital
redemption
reserve £m
Hedging
reserve2
£m
Cost of
hedging
£m
Other
reserve1
£m
Foreign
exchange
reserve
£m
Re
ear
Credit for share‐
based payments
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
Deferred tax on
share schemes
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
As at 30 March
2019
406.3
416.9
2,210.5
(14.6)
11.7 (6,542.2)
(44.7)
6
(1) The “Other reserve” was originally created as part of the capital restructuring that took place in 2002. It represents the difference
between the nominal value of the shares issued prior to the capital reduction by the Company (being the carrying value of the investment in
Marks and Spencer plc) and the share capital, share premium and capital redemption reserve of Marks and Spencer plc at the date of the
transaction.
(2) Amounts “reclassified and reported in profit or loss” in 2017/18 includes the revaluation of the cross currency swaps, offsetting the
revaluation of the USD hedged bonds within finance costs.
(3) Included within Retained Earnings is the fair value through other comprehensive income reserve.
Consolidated statement of cash flows

--- Page 2317 ---
 
Notes
52 weeks ended 30
March 2019 £m
52 weeks ended 31
March 2018 £m
Cash flows from operating activities
 
 
 
Cash generated from operations
26
1,041.0
944.1
Income tax paid
 
(105.7)
(94.3)
Net cash inflow from operating
activities
 
935.3
849.8
 
 
 
 
Cash flows from investing activities
 
 
 
Proceeds on property disposals
 
48.1
3.2
Purchase of property, plant and equipment
 
(217.8)
(274.9)
Proceeds on disposal of Hong Kong
business
 
–
22.9
Purchase of intangible assets
 
(95.1)
(74.3)
(Purchase)/sale of current financial assets
 
(128.1)
0.8
Interest received
 
7.4
6.0
Purchase of investment in joint venture
 
(2.5)
–
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(388.0)
(316.3)
 
 
 
 
Cash flows from financing activities
 
 
 
Interest paid1
 
(86.4)
(112.2)
Cash outflow from borrowings
 
(46.7)
–
Cash inflow from borrowings
 
–
43.8
Payment of obligations under finance
leases
 
(3.3)
(2.6)
Payment of liability to the Marks &
Spencer UK Pension Scheme
 
(61.6)
(59.6)
Equity dividends paid
 
(303.5)
(303.4)
Shares issued on exercise of employee
share options
 
0.6
0.1
Purchase of own shares by employee trust
 
(5.5)
(3.1)
Issuance/(redemption) of Medium Term
Notes
 
1.4
(328.2)
Net cash used in financing activities
 
(505.0)
(765.2)
 
 
 
 
Net cash inflow/(outflow) from
activities
 
42.3
(231.7)
Effects of exchange rate changes
 
(0.2)
(3.5)
Opening net cash
 
171.0
406.2
Closing net cash
27
213.1
171.0
(1) Includes interest on the partnership liability to the Marks & Spencer UK Pension Scheme.

--- Page 2318 ---
 
Notes
52 weeks ended 30
March 2019 £m
52 weeks ended 31
March 2018 £m
Reconciliation of net cash flow to
movement in net debt
 
 
 
Opening net debt
 
(1,827.5)
(1,934.7)
Net cash inflow/(outflow) from activities
 
42.3
(231.7)
Increase/(decrease) in current financial
assets
 
128.1
(0.8)
Decrease in debt financing
 
110.2
346.6
Exchange and other non‐cash movements
 
1.8
(6.9)
Movement in net debt
 
282.4
107.2
Closing net debt
27
(1,545.1)
(1,827.5)
The accompanying notes, which are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements, are included in Marks and Spencer’s
2019 annual report, available in the Corporate Site section of the company’s website.

--- Page 2319 ---
Appendix B 
Specimen Financial Statements: adidas AG
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position (IFRS) (€ in millions)

--- Page 2320 ---
 
Note Dec. 31, 2018 Dec. 31, 20172 Change in %
Assets
 
 
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
06
2,629
1,598
64.5
Short‐term financial assets
07
6
5
5.3
Accounts receivable
08
2,418
2,315
4.4
Other current financial assets
09
542
393
38.1
Inventories
10
3,445
3,692
(6.7)
Income tax receivables
38
48
71
(32.3)
Other current assets
11
725
498
45.6
Assets classified as held for sale
12
–
72
(100.0)
Total current assets
 
9,813
8,645
13.5
 
 
 
 
 
Property, plant and equipment
13
2,237
2,000
11.8
Goodwill
14
1,245
1,220
2.0
Trademarks
15
844
806
4.7
Other intangible assets
15
196
154
27.0
Long‐term financial assets
16
276
236
16.9
Other non‐current financial assets
17
256
219
16.9
Deferred tax assets
38
651
630
3.4
Other non‐current assets
18
94
108
(13.5)
Total non‐current assets
 
5,799
5,374
7.9
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets
 
15,612
14,019
11.4
Liabilities and equity
 
 
 
 
Short‐term borrowings
19
66
137
(51.5)
Accounts payable
 
2,300
1,975
16.5
Other current financial liabilities
20
186
362
(48.6)
Income taxes
38
268
424
(36.8)
Other current provisions
21
1,232
741
66.2
Current accrued liabilities
22
2,305
2,180
5.7
Other current liabilities
23
477
473
1.0
Total current liabilities
 
6,834
6,291
8.6
 
 
 
 
 
Long‐term borrowings
19
1,609
983
63.7
Other non‐current financial liabilities
24
103
22
357.7
Pensions and similar obligations
25
246
298
(17.3)
Deferred tax liabilities
38
241
190
26.8
Other non‐current provisions
21
128
80
60.2
Non‐current accrued liabilities
22
19
85
(77.7)
Other non‐current liabilities
26
68
53
29.2

--- Page 2321 ---
 
Note Dec. 31, 2018 Dec. 31, 20172 Change in %
Total non‐current liabilities
 
2,414
1,711
41.1
 
 
 
 
 
Share capital
 
199
204
(2.3)
Reserves
 
123
(29)
n.a. 
Retained earnings
 
6,054
5,858
3.4
Shareholders’ equity
27
6,377
6,032
5.7
 
 
 
 
 
Non‐controlling interests
29
(13)
(15)
15.3
 
 
 
 
 
Total equity
 
6,364
6,017
5.8
 
 
 
 
 
Total liabilities and equity
 
15,612
14,019
11.4
(1) IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 are initially applied at January 1, 2018. Under the transition methods chosen, comparative information is not
restated except for certain hedging requirements.
(2) Restated according to IAS 8, see Note 03.
The accompanying Notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Income Statement (IFRS) (€ in millions)
 
Note
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2018
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2017 Change
Net sales
40
21,915
21,218
3.3%
Cost of sales
 
10,552
10,514
0.4%
Gross profit
 
11,363
10,703
6.2%
(% of net sales)
 
51.8%
50.4%
1.4pp
Royalty and commission income
 
129
115
12.0%
Other operating income
33
48
17
187.9%
Other operating expenses
13, 15, 34
9,172
8,766
4.6%
(% of net sales)
 
41.9%
41.3%
0.5pp
Marketing and point‐of‐sale expenses
 
3,001
2,724
10.2%
(% of net sales)
 
13.7%
12.8%
0.9pp
Distribution and selling expenses
 
4,450
4,307
3.3%
(% of net sales)
 
20.3%
20.3%
0.0pp
General and administration expenses
 
1,576
1,568
0.5%
(% of net sales)
 
7.2%
7.4%
(0.2pp)
Sundry expenses
 
105
130
(19.7%)
(% of net sales)
 
0.5%
0.6%
(0.1pp)
Impairment losses (net) on accounts
receivable and contract assets
 
41
37
12.0%
Operating profit
 
2,368
2,070
14.4%
(% of net sales)
 
10.8%
9.8%
1.1pp
Financial income
36
57
46
24.1%

--- Page 2322 ---
 
Note
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2018
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2017 Change
Financial expenses
36
47
93 (49.6%)
Income before taxes
 
2,378
2,023
17.6%
(% of net sales)
 
10.9%
9.5%
1.3pp
Income taxes
38
669
668
0.1%
(% of income before taxes)
 
28.1%
33.0%
(4.9pp)
Net income from continuing operations
 
1,709
1,354
26.2%
(% of net sales)
 
7.8%
6.4%
1.4pp
Losses from discontinued operations, net of
tax
04
5
254 (98.2%)
Net income
 
1,704
1,100
55.0%
(% of net sales)
 
7.8%
5.2%
2.6pp
Net income attributable to shareholders
 
1,702
1,097
55.1%
(% of net sales)
 
7.8%
5.2%
2.6pp
Net income attributable to non‐
controlling interests
 
3
3
(6.1%)
 
 
 
 
 
Basic earnings per share from continuing
operations (in €)
39
8.46
6.68
26.7%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing
operations (in €)
39
8.45
6.63
27.4%
 
 
 
 
 
Basic earnings per share from continuing and
discontinued operations (in €)
39
8.44
5.42
55.6%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing
and discontinued operations (in €)
39
8.42
5.38
56.5%
The accompanying Notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (IFRS) (€ in millions)

--- Page 2323 ---
 
Note
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2018
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2017
Net income after taxes
 
1,704
1,100
Items of other comprehensive income that will not be
reclassified subsequently to profit or loss
 
 
 
Remeasurements of defined benefit plans (IAS 19), net of tax2
25
(13)
23
Net loss on other equity investments (IFRS 9), net of tax
31
(8)
–
Subtotal of items of other comprehensive income that
will not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss
 
(21)
23
Items of other comprehensive income that will be
reclassified to profit or loss when specific conditions
are met
 
 
 
Net gain/(loss) on cash flow hedges and net foreign investment
hedges, net of tax
31
232
(375)
Net gain on cost of hedging reserve, net of tax – options
31
3
1
Net loss on cost of hedging reserve, net of tax – forward
contracts
31
(10)
–
Reclassification of foreign currency differences on loss of
significant influence
 
(4)
15
Currency translation differences
 
(49)
(481)3
Subtotal of items of other comprehensive income that
will be reclassified to profit or loss when specific
conditions are met
 
171
(840)
 
 
 
 
Other comprehensive income
 
150
(818)
 
 
 
 
Total comprehensive income
 
1,855
282
 
 
 
 
Attributable to shareholders of adidas AG
 
1,851
278
Attributable to non‐controlling interests
 
4
4
(1) IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 are initially applied at January 1, 2018. Under the transition methods chosen, comparative information is not
restated except for certain hedging requirements.
(2) Includes actuarial gains or losses relating to defined benefit obligations, return on plan assets (excluding interest income) and the asset
ceiling effect.
(3) Restated according to IAS 8, see Note 03.
The accompanying Notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity (IFRS) (€ in millions)

--- Page 2324 ---
 
Note
Share
capital
Capital
reserve
Cumulative
currency
translation
differences
Hedging
reserve
Cost of
hedging
reserve
–
options
Cost of
hedging
reserve –
forward
contracts
Other
reserves2
Ret
ear
Balance at
December
31, 2016
 
201
838
(52)
146
–
–
(182)
IFRS 9 transition
effect, net of tax
31
 
 
 
 
(6)
 
 
Adjustment
according to IAS
8, net of tax
03
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at
January
1, 2017
 
201
838
(52)
146
(6)
–
(182)
Other
comprehensive
income
 
 
 
(468)3
(375)
1
 
23
Net income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
comprehensive
income
 
 
 
(468)
(375)
1
–
23
Reissuance of
treasury shares
due to the
conversion of
convertible
bonds
27
3
46
 
 
 
 
 
Repurchase of
treasury shares
27
(0)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repurchase of
treasury shares
due to equity‐
settled share‐
based payment
27
(0)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reissuance of
treasury shares
due to equity‐
settled share‐
based payment
27
0
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividend
payment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity‐settled
share‐based
payment
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at
December
31, 2017
 
204
884
(520)
(229)
(5)
–
(159)
5

--- Page 2325 ---
 
Note
Share
capital
Capital
reserve
Cumulative
currency
translation
differences
Hedging
reserve
Cost of
hedging
reserve
–
options
Cost of
hedging
reserve –
forward
contracts
Other
reserves2
Ret
ear
IFRS 9 transition
effect, net of tax
31
 
 
 
(6)
 
6
 
IFRS 15
transition
effect, net of tax
32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at
January
1, 2018
 
204
884
(520)
(234)
(5)
6
(159)
5
Other
comprehensive
income
 
 
 
(54)
231
3
(10)
(21)
Net income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total
comprehensive
income
 
 
 
(54)
231
3
(10)
(21)
Reissuance of
treasury shares
due to the
conversion of
convertible
bonds
27
0
3
 
 
 
 
 
Repurchase of
treasury shares
27
(5)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Repurchase of
treasury shares
due to equity‐
settled share‐
based payment
27
(0)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reissuance of
treasury shares
due to equity‐
settled share‐
based payment
27
0
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dividend
payment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity‐settled
share‐based
payment
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at
December
31, 2018
 
199
887
(574)
(3)
(3)
(5)
(180)
6
(1) IFRS 9 and IFRS 15 are initially applied at January 1, 2018. Under the transition methods chosen, comparative information is not
restated except for certain hedging requirements.
(2) Reserves for remeasurements of defined benefit plans (IAS 19), option plans and acquisition of shares from non‐controlling interest
shareholders.

--- Page 2326 ---
(3) Adjusted according to IAS 8 with an amount of € 57 million, see Note 03.
The accompanying Notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (IFRS) (€ in millions)

--- Page 2327 ---
 
Note
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2018
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2017
Operating activities:
 
 
 
Income before taxes
 
2,378
2,023
 
 
 
 
Adjustments for:
 
 
 
Depreciation, amortization and impairment losses
13, 14, 15, 34, 36
490
484
Reversals of impairment losses
33
(3)
(1)
Unrealized foreign exchange gains, net
 
(10)
(75)
Interest income
36
(24)
(25)
Interest expense
36
42
62
Losses on sale of property, plant and equipment
and intangible assets, net
 
9
17
Other non‐cash expenses
33, 34
17
3
Payment for external funding of pension
obligations (CTA)
 
(90)
(30)
Proceeds from early termination of promotion and
advertising contracts
05, 33
–
76
Operating profit before working capital
changes
 
2,808
2,534
Increase in receivables and other assets
 
(209)
(477)
Decrease/(increase) in inventories
 
180
(216)
Increase in accounts payable and other liabilities
 
741
422
Cash generated from operations before
interest and taxes
 
3,520
2,263
Interest paid
 
(40)
(65)
Income taxes paid
 
(815)
(556)
Net cash generated from operating activities
– continuing operations
 
2,666
1,641
Net cash (used in)/generated from operating
activities – discontinued operations
 
(20)
6
Net cash generated from operating activities
 
2,646
1,648
 
 
 
 
Investing activities:
 
 
 
Purchase of trademarks and other intangible assets
 
(96)
(74)
Proceeds from sale of trademarks and other
intangible assets
 
2
0
Purchase of property, plant and equipment
 
(611)
(678)
Proceeds from sale of property, plant and
equipment
 
13
2
Proceeds from sale of assets held for sale
12
71
–
Proceeds from sale of a disposal group
12
18
6

--- Page 2328 ---
 
Note
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2018
Year ending
Dec. 31, 2017
Proceeds from disposal of discontinued operations
net of cash disposed
 
–
174
Purchase of sale of short‐term financial assets
 
(0)
(0)
Purchase of investments and other long‐term assets
 
(56)
(132)
Interest received
 
24
25
Net cash used in investing activities –
continuing operations
 
(636)
(676)
Net cash used in investing activities – discontinued
operations
 
–
(4)
Net cash used in investing activities
 
(636)
(680)
 
 
 
 
Financing activities:
 
 
 
Proceeds from long‐term borrowings
 
141
–
Proceeds from issuance of a convertible bond
19
518
–
Payments for options related to a convertible bond
19
(35)
–
Repayments of finance lease obligations
 
(2)
(2)
Dividend paid to shareholders of adidas AG
27
(528)
(405)
Dividend paid to non‐controlling interest
shareholders
 
(1)
(1)
Repurchase of treasury shares
27
(1,000)
(85)
Repurchase of treasury shares due to share‐based
payments
 
(22)
(15)
Proceeds from reissuance of treasury shares due to
share‐based payments
 
19
13
Proceeds from short‐term borrowings
19
9
–
Repayments of short‐term borrowings
19
(49)
(273)
Net cash used in financing activities –
continuing operations
 
(951)
(769)
Net cash used in financing activities – discontinued
operations
 
–
(0)
Net cash used in financing activities
 
(951)
(769)
 
 
 
 
Effect of exchange rates on cash
 
(29)
(111)
Increase of cash and cash equivalents
 
1,031
88
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
06
1,598
1,510
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
06
2,629
1,598
The accompanying Notes are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements.
The accompanying notes, which are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements, are included in adidas’ 2018 annual
report, available in the Corporate Information section of the company’s website.

--- Page 2329 ---
Appendix C 
Specimen Financial Statements: Puma Group
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position (in € million)

--- Page 2330 ---
ASSETS
Notes 12 / 31 / 2018 12 /31 /2017
Cash and cash equivalents
3
463.7
415.0
Inventories
4
915.1
778.5
Trade receivables
5
553.7
503.7
Income tax receivables
23
33.9
26.8
Other current financial assets
6
111.2
66.7
Other current assets
7
115.2
94.1
Current assets
 
2,192.8
1,884.8
Deferred income taxes
8
207.6
207.9
Property, plant and equipment
9
294.6
260.1
Intangible assets
10
437.5
412.9
Investments in associates
11
0.0
16.6
Other non‐current financial assets
12
65.4
51.7
Other non‐current assets
12
9.4
19.8
Non‐current assets
 
1,014.4
969.0
TOTAL ASSETS
 
3,207.2
2,853.8
LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
 
 
Current financial liabilities
13
20.5
29.0
Trade payables
13
705.3
646.1
Income taxes
23
68.0
54.7
Other current provisions
16
39.6
86.2
Other current financial liabilities
13
57.2
94.9
Other current liabilities
13
304.6
145.5
Current liabilities
 
1,195.2
1,056.5
Deferred income tax liabilities
8
47.7
37.6
Pension provisions
15
28.9
29.7
Other non‐current provisions
16
26.3
34.6
Liabilities from acquisitions
17
3.3
4.8
Other non‐current financial liabilities
13
180.7
30.9
Other non‐current liabilities
13
2.9
3.0
Non‐current liabilities
 
289.7
140.7
Subscribed capital
18
38.6
38.6
Group reserves
18
146.8
50.7
Retained earnings
18
1,546.7
1,566.1
Treasury stock
18
–28.9
–30.0
Equity attributable to the shareholders of the parent
 
1,703.3
1,625.5
Non‐controlling interests
18
18.9
31.2
Shareholders’ equity
 
1,722.2
1,656.7
TOTAL LIABILITIES AND SHAREHOLDERS’ EQUITY
 
3,207.2
2,853.8
Consolidated Income Statement (in € million)

--- Page 2331 ---
 
Notes
2018
2017
Sales
20, 26 4,648.3 4,135.9
Cost of sales
26 –2,399.0 –2,181.5
Gross profit
26 2,249.4 1,954.3
Royalty and commission income
 
16.3
15.8
Other operating income and expenses
21 –1,928.4 –1,725.6
Operating income (EBIT)
 
337.4
244.6
Result from associated companies
22
–1.5
1.6
Financial income
22
11.6
10.3
Financial expenses
22
–34.1
–25.3
Financial result
 
–24.0
–13.4
Earnings before taxes (EBT)
 
313.4
231.2
Taxes on income
23
–83.6
–63.3
Consolidated net earnings for the year
 
229.8
168.0
attributable to: 
Non‐controlling interest
18
–42.4
–32.2
Equity holders of the parent (net earnings)
 
187.4
135.8
Earnings per share (€)
24
12.54
9.09
Earnings per share (€)‐diluted
24
12.54
9.09
Weighted average shares outstanding (million)
24
14.947
14.943
Weighted average shares outstanding, diluted (million)
24
14.947
14.943
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (in € million)

--- Page 2332 ---
 
After
tax
2018
Tax
impact
2018
Before
tax
2018
After
tax
2017
Tax
impact
2017
Before
tax 2017
Net earnings before attribution
229.8
 
229.8 168.0
 
168.0
Currency changes
–11.7
 
–11.7 –114.9
 
–114.9
Cashflow hedge
 
 
 
 
 
 
Release to the income statement
42.9
–3.5
46.4
–43.8
0.1
–43.9
Market value for cashflow hedges
35.6
–1.6
37.2
–55.0
4.2
–59.1
Neutral effects of available‐for‐sale financial
assets*
 
 
 
3.8
0.0
3.8
Share in the other comprehensive income of
at equity accounted investments
–0.2
 
–0.2
–0.4
 
–0.4
Items expected to be reclassified to the
income statement in the future
66.7
–5.1
71.8
–
210.3
4.2 –214.5
Remeasurements of the net defined benefit
liability
0.3
–0.3
0.6
1.0
–0.3
1.3
Neutral effects financial assets through other
comprehensive income (FVTOCI)*
9.1
0.0
9.1
 
 
 
Items not expected to be reclassified to
the income statement in the future
9.4
–0.3
9.7
1.0
–0.3
1.3
Other result
76.1
–5.4
81.5
–
209.3
3.9 –213.2
Comprehensive income
305.9
–5.4
311.3 –41.4
3.9
–45.2
attributable to:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non‐controlling interest
43.4
 
43.4
29.2
 
29.2
Equity holder of the parent
262.5
–5.4
267.8
–70.6
3.9
–74.5
* Due to the first‐time application of IFRS 9, the line “Neutral effects of available‐for‐sale financial assets” in the statement of
comprehensive income was allocated to those components that will not be reclassified to the income statement in the future and renamed
“Neutral effects of financial assets in the FVTOCI category”. Prior year figures have not been adjusted.
Consolidated Statement of Cashflows (in € million)

--- Page 2333 ---
 
Notes
2018
2017*
Operating activities
 
 
 
Earnings before tax (EBT)
 
313.4
231.2
Adjustments for:
 
 
 
Depreciation
9, 10
81.5
70.4
Non‐realized currency gains / losses, net
 
–15.7
15.7
Result from associated companies
11
1.5
–1.6
Financial income
22
–11.3
–10.1
Financial expenses
22
19.7
18.5
Changes from the sale of fixed assets
 
1.0
1.7
Changes to pension accruals
15
–0.6
–0.4
Other non‐cash effected expenses / income
 
8.6
5.6
Gross Cashflow
27
398.0
330.9
Changes in receivables and other current assets
5, 6, 7
–61.2
–92.8
Changes in inventories
4
–122.8
–117.2
Changes in trade payables and other current liabilities
13
146.0
159.4
Cash inflow from operating activities
 
360.1 280.3
Dividends received
11, 12
0.9
1.0
Income taxes paid
23
–82.9
–42.6
Net cash from operating activities
27
278.1 238.8
Investing activities
 
 
 
Proceeds from the sale of longterm shareholdings
11
23.5
0.0
Purchase of property and equipment
9, 10
–130.2 –122.9
Proceeds from sale of property and equipment
 
1.5
12,6
Payment for other assets
12
–3.6
–1.7
Interest received
22
3.5
1.8
Cash outflow from investing activities
 –105.3 –110.3
Financing activities
 
 
 
Changes in leasing liabilities
13
–1.8
–0.2
Raising / (‐) Repayment of current financial liabilities
13
–16.6
–12.1
Raising of non‐current financial liabilities
13
145.2
15.4
Dividend payments to equity holders of the parent
18
–186.8
–11.2
Dividend payments to non‐controlling interests
18
–55.7
–13.4
Interest paid
22
–12.6
–11.6
Other changes
 
0.0
–2.0
Cash outflow from financing activities
27 –128.3 –34.9
Exchange rate‐related changes in cashflow
 
4.2
–5.3
Change in cash and cash equivalents
 
48.7
88.3
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of the financial year
 
415.0
326.7
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the financial year
3, 27
463.7
415.0
* Prior‐year figures adjusted, see Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements chapter 27 (Notes to the Cash flow statement)

--- Page 2334 ---
Statement of Changes In Equity (in € million)

--- Page 2335 ---
 
Subscribed
capital
 
 
 
 
Reserves
Retained
earnings
Treasury
stock
 
 
Capital
reserve
Revenue
reserves
Difference
from
currency
conversion
Cash
flow
hedges
At equity
accounted
investments
 
 
12 / 31 / 2016
38.6
193.7
55.6
–100.9
54.3
0.5
1,496.6
–31.4
Net Earnings
 
 
 
 
 
 
135.8
 
Net income
directly
recognized in
equity
 
 
4.8
–111.7
–99.1
–0.4
 
 
Total
comprehensive
income
 
 
4.8
–111.7 –99.1
–0.4
135.8
 
Dividends paid to
equity holders of
the parent
company / non‐
controlling
interests
 
 
 
 
 
 
–11.2
 
Transfers to
revenue reserves
 
 
55.0
 
 
 
–55.0
 
Repurchase of
equity
instruments
 
–1.8
 
 
 
 
 
 
Utilization /
Issue of shares
 
0.8
 
 
 
 
 
1.4
12 / 31 / 2017
38.6
192.6
115.3
–212.6 –44.8
0.2
1,566.1
–30.0
Net Earnings
 
 
 
 
 
 
187.4
 
Net income
directly
recognized in
equity
 
 
9.4
–13.0
78.8
–0.2
 
 
Total
comprehensive
income
 
 
9.4
–13.0
78.8
–0.2
187.4
 
Dividends paid to
equity holders of
the parent
company / non‐
controlling
interests
 
 
 
 
 
 
–186.8
 
Transfers to
revenue reserves
 
 
20.0
 
 
 
–20.0
 

--- Page 2336 ---
 
Subscribed
capital
 
 
 
 
Reserves
Retained
earnings
Treasury
stock
Repurchase of
equity
instruments
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Utilization /
Issue of shares
 
1.0
 
 
 
 
 
1.1
12 / 31 / 2018
38.6
193.6
144.7
–225.6
34.1
–0.0
1,546.7
–28.9
The accompanying notes, which are an integral part of these consolidated financial statements, are included in Puma’s 2018 annual
report, available in the About Puma section of the company’s website.

--- Page 2337 ---
Company Index
A
Abu Dhabi Aviation, 7-24
Acer Incorporated, 5-9
Activision Blizzard, 23-2
Adecoagro SA, 13-15
adidas, 5-4, 5-10, 5-11, 6-4, 9-39, 11-52, 12-9, 12-39, 14-42, 15-47, 16-
57, 17-74, 18-72, 19-56, 20-43, 22-52, 23-63, 24-66
Adler AG, 19-57
ÆON Co. Ltd., 5-7, 10-4
AerCap, 21-5, 21-6
Ahold Delhaize Group, 5-5, 5-8, 5-9, 5-12, 5-26, 9-2, 19-12, 21-3, 23-
3, 24-26
AIG, 17-38
Air Berlin, 14-23
Airbus, 2-19, 7-6, 18-4–5, 21-5, 24-17
Air Canada, 15-5
Air China Ltd., 1-5
Air France, 21-6, 21-9, 21-31–32, 21-67, 21-68
Air Liquide, 14-2
Air Products & Chemicals, 17-34
Aixtron Aktiengesellschaft, 23-3
Alcatel-Lucent Enterprise, 12-1, 18-40, 22-3

--- Page 2338 ---
Alibaba, 8-10
Allianz, 15-15
All Nippon Airways Co. Ltd., 7-6
Alphabet, 15-5, 17-2
Altera International, 17-20
Altria Group, Inc., 9-42, 9-43
Amazon.com, 1-3, 8-10, 12-18, 12-23, 17-20, 19-2, 21-21
Amazon Europe Holding Technologies SCS (AEHT), 19-2
Amazon EU Sarl, 19-2
Ameren, 11-25
American Airlines, 21-2
American Express, 7-20, 17-2
Anheuser-Busch InBev (AB InBev), 3-11, 5-10, 10-17, 23-24, 24-39
A.P. Møller–Maersk, 10-22, 24-11, 24-12
Aphrodite Gold Ltd., 2-3
Apple Inc., 1-3, 7-1, 7-2, 8-7, 12-9, 12-22, 12-23, 19-2, 23-30
April-Marcus, Inc., 8-8
Arcam AB, 15-21
ASE, 16-9
AstraZeneca plc, 12-10
AT&T, 1-3, 1-5
Auchan, 10-4
Avis, 18-45
B

--- Page 2339 ---
Bank of America, 19-26
Barclays, 17-33, 17-38, 21-5, 21-6, 24-8
Barloworld Limited, 13-28
Barrick Gold Corporation, 9-39, 9-40
BASF Group, 12-10, 15-24
Basis Technology, 17-20
Bayer AG, 12-44, 14-20, 16-61
Baytex Energy Corp., 23-23
BBVA, 21-36
Beijing Lenovo Healthcare Information Technology, 17-19, 17-21
Beneficial Corporation, 14-12
Berkshire Hathaway, 1-3, 17-2
Beru AG, 13-2
Best Buy, 7-8
BHP (formerly BHP Billiton), 15-47
BlackBerry, 12-9
Bloomingdale’s, 9-15
BMW, 15-5
BMW Financial Services, 21-5
BNP Paribas, 5-29
Body Shop, 18-45
Boeing Capital, 21-5
Bohai Pharmaceutical Group, 16-10
Bombardier, 15-5
BP plc, 1-3, 10-3, 13-23, 15-2, 15-12, 15-15, 17-37, 20-2, 23-3

--- Page 2340 ---
British Airways, 2-19, 10-3, 17-33, 18-25, 18-73, 20-1, 21-1, 21-2, 21-
67
British American Tobacco, 2-9
British Sky Broadcasting Group plc, 17-31
Burberry, 15-15
BuybackLetter.com, 15-15
C
Calcbench, 24-8
Canadian Pacific Corporation, 14-7
Canon, 12-8
Carillion, 1-13, 2-4, 2-10
Carrefour SA, 7-10, 8-3, 9-3, 9-15, 9-16, 9-20, 11-52, 13-16, 17-5, 17-7,
18-29, 21-2, 21-3, 21-8, 21-33, 22-6, 24-17
Caterpillar, Inc., 7-2, 10-3, 24-13
Cathay Pacific Airways, 3-18, 18-4–5, 20-29, 21-1, 21-2
Cereal Partners, 18-29
Chase, 21-5
China Construction Bank Corp., 14-23
China Minsheng Bank, 16-4
China National Petroleum, 1-3, 15-2
China Petroleum & Chemical Corp., 8-3
China Railway Construction Corporation, 15-5
China Southern Airlines, 3-23, 13-8
China Southern Power Grid Co., 12-1
Christian Dior, 5-6, 5-7, 5-27, 12-2, 13-16

--- Page 2341 ---
Chrysler, 21-5
Ciba-Geigy, 8-40
Cisco, 7-2
CitiCapital, 21-37, 21-38
Citigroup, 5-29, 19-26, 21-5
Clorox, 12-1, 12-2
Cloudera, 17-18
CMA CGM Group, 10-22
CNH Capital, 21-5, 21-10
CNH Global, 21-10
Coca-Cola Company, 12-2, 12-23, 14-7, 17-2, 17-33, 17-37, 23-3
Commerzbank, 12-13
Commonwealth Edison Co., 14-43
Crédit Agricole, 6-2
Credit Suisse, 21-5
CVS Health, 1-3
D
Daimler AG, 1-3, 4-4, 7-20, 10-19, 21-6, 22-3, 23-29
Daimler Truck Financial, 7-20
Dairy Queen, 18-45
Danisco A/S, 10-17
Darden Restaurants, 21-35
Debenhams, 9-15, 9-16
Delta, 17-33, 21-2

--- Page 2342 ---
Deutsche Bank, 5-29, 12-13, 17-33, 21-5, 21-36–37
Deutsche Bundesbank, 14-14–15
Deutsche Telekom, 1-5
Dexia, 6-2
Diageo, 21-3
Disney, 12-4, 12-7, 16-12
Dorsel Corp., 17-75
Dropbox, 17-18
Drugstore.com, 17-20
E
Eagle Clothes, Inc., 8-8
Électricité de France S.A., 14-7
Enhance Electronics Co., Ltd., 11-2
Enron, 2-4, 2-10, 5-4, 14-23, 14-25, 17-34
Equinor, 24-16
E* Trade Financial, 12-40
Europcar, 18-45
European Central Bank (ECB), 14-14–15
EuroSPAR, 18-45
Eurotec, 14-43
EXOR Group, 1-3
ExxonMobil, 1-3, 15-2, 17-34
Eziba.com, 17-20

--- Page 2343 ---
F
Facebook, 12-9, 12-23, 15-5, 19-2
Falconbridge Ltd. Nickel Mines, 11-12
Fannie Mae, 17-34
Fiat, 7-6
Ford, 2-11, 2-14, 16-12, 21-5
Forter Corp., 17-75
FROZ, 18-45
Fruehauf, 24-4
G
G20, 19-2
General Electric (GE), 4-3, 7-2, 20-2, 23-30
General Motors, 2-11, 21-6
George Weston Ltd., 8-3
GlaxoSmithKline, 12-23, 12-43, 17-34, 19-59
Glencore, 1-3
Global Forum, 19-2
Gold Bullion Development Corporation, 15-18
Golden Gate Capital, 21-35
Goody’s Burger House, 4-6
Google, 12-18, 12-23, 17-2, 19-2
Greenrock Research, 15-18
H

--- Page 2344 ---
Hachette, 13-8
Hasbro, Inc., 5-57
Hathaway Disposal Ltd., 21-26
Healthscope, 21-36
Heineken, 7-7
Helio Company, 24-24
Henkel, 14-15
Hertz, 18-24, 18-45
Hewlett-Packard, 9-7
Hitachi, 5-27
Home Depot, 7-8
Homestake Mining Company, 19-56–57
Honda, 2-11, 8-24
Honeywell Inc., 15-12
Hon Hai Precision, 10-2
Hortonworks Inc., 2-12
Hotel Royal Limited, 11-23
HSBC, 7-6, 14-23, 17-34, 21-36
HTC, 12-9, 15-12
Husqvarna Group, 11-2
Hyundai, 2-14, 4-3
I
IBM, 5-18, 12-23, 21-21
IBM Global Financing, 21-5

--- Page 2345 ---
IKEA, 1-14
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, 6-10
Infosys, 7-4
ING, 17-33
Instar Company, 17-75
Intel, 5-4, 11-10, 12-18
Interbrand Corp., 12-23
International Airlines Group, 24-6
International Integrated Reporting Council, 12-2
International Lease Financial Corp. (ILFC), 21-6
iSOFT, 24-6
Ivanhoe Mines Ltd., 21-5, 21-10
J
J. Chahine Capital, 17-12
Japan Airlines (JAL), 17-33, 21-1, 21-2, 21-37, 21-38, 21-62, 21-63
Japan Display, 14-20
Jinpain International Ltd., 15-47
Johnson & Johnson, 12-18, 12-39–40
Jones plc, 24-47
JPMorgan Chase, 19-26
K
KBC Bank, 24-8
KFC, 18-45

--- Page 2346 ---
Kimco Realty, 11-57
KPMG, 19-18
Kraft/Cadbury, 1-24
Kroger, 11-15
L
La Boucherie, 18-45
Lectra SA, 9-21, 24-26, 24-27
Lehman Brothers, 24-8
Lenovo Educational Technology, 17-21
Lenovo Group, 2-11, 5-4, 5-12, 5-26, 8-10, 8-17, 11-21, 17-19, 17-21,
21-8
LG Electronics, 5-25, 8-8, 11-1, 11-2
Liberty International, 11-57, 21-36
Loblaw Companies Ltd., 8-4
L’Oréal, 4-4
Louis Vuitton (LVMH Group), 3-19–20, 7-24, 14-15
Lufthansa, 10-22
Lululemon Athletica, Inc., 2-12, 7-7, 8-8
M
Mahindra Satyam, 24-4, 24-34
Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co., 7-26
MapMyFitness, 12-9

--- Page 2347 ---
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S), 2-6–7, 3-28, 4-2, 5-5, 9-20, 9-39, 11-
52, 12-39, 13-29, 14-42, 15-46, 16-13, 16-57, 17-74, 18-72, 19-56, 20-2,
20-43, 21-2, 21-3, 21-15, 21-16, 21-26, 21-33, 21-67, 22-3, 22-51, 23-
62, 24-5, 24-28, 24-29, 24-66
Marriott, 18-45
MasterCard, 6-24, 7-20
McDonald’s Corporation, 1-5, 12-8, 17-33, 18-45, 21-3
McKesson, 1-3
Mercedes-Benz, 12-23
Merck, 12-8, 12-39–40, 12-44
Metallgesellschaft, 17-34
miCoach, 12-9
Microsoft, 7-2, 12-18, 12-23, 13-8, 19-2
Mitchells and Butlers, 18-45
Mitsubishi, 17-3
Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, 24-8
Monsanto Chemical Corporation, 24-33
Moody’s Investors Service, 23-2
Morgan Stanley, 5-29
Morningstar Inc., 15-18
Morrisons, 11-25
N
Nestlé Group, 1-6, 4-9, 5-27, 8-15, 11-11, 11-23, 11-24, 12-17, 13-18,
13-24
Nestlé S.A., 15-5

--- Page 2348 ---
Netflix, 19-2, 24-8
Network Rail, 4-12
New Century, 2-17
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, 1-5, 2-8
Nissan, 8-3, 8-4
Nokia, 1-5, 2-20, 3-18, 5-5, 5-7, 6-4, 7-7, 8-3, 9-3, 9-7, 11-29, 12-3, 12-
9, 13-15, 13-27, 17-3, 17-5, 17-33
Nordsee, 18-45
Nordstrom, Inc., 5-58
Novartis Group, 8-40, 12-18, 13-16, 14-25, 14-26, 14-27
Noven Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 8-40
NYSE Euronext, 15-1
O
Olympus Corporation, 2-10
OMX, 15-1
Ophir Energy plc, 15-18
Oracle, 7-2
Overseas National Airways, 15-20
P
Páo de Acucar, 15-4
Parker Shipping, 21-41, 21-43–44, 21-73
Parmalat, 1-13, 24-34
PayPal, 14-2
Pemex, 5-4

--- Page 2349 ---
Penn Central Railroad, 13-7
PepsiCo, 12-22, 16-59
Pernod Ricard, 9-22
Perrigo Company, 21-4
Petra Perdana, 14-24
PetroChina Company Limited, 10-19
Petronas, 13-15
Pirelli, 17-12
Pizza Hut, 18-45
Polymer Group Inc., 12-2
Priceline, 18-24
Procter & Gamble, 8-3, 17-34
Puma, 5-5, 9-39, 11-52, 12-39, 14-42, 15-47, 16-57, 17-74, 18-72, 19-
56, 20-43, 22-52, 23-63, 24-4, 24-66
Puma SE, 24-21, 24-24–25
Q
Qantas Airways Limited, 13-21
Qihoo 360 Technology, 16-9
Qualcomm, 7-2
Quick, 18-45
Qwest Communications International Inc., 18-2
R
Radisson, 18-45
Really Useful Group, 12-7

--- Page 2350 ---
RELX Group, 5-9, 21-3, 21-33
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (RPR), 8-40
Rite-Aid, 3-70
RJR Nabisco, 14-2
Roche Group, 12-18, 16-5
Rolls-Royce, 18-2
Royal Ahold, 2-4
Royal Bank of Scotland, 6-2
Royal Dutch Shell, 1-3, 8-3, 10-2, 10-10, 11-17, 15-2, 15-12, 15-15
RPC Group plc, 4-2, 4-8–9
Ryanair, 3-23, 10-22
Ryobi, 7-8
S
Samsung Electronics, 1-3, 2-7, 12-8, 12-18, 12-23, 15-23
Sanofi, 14-15
Santos SA, 13-16
SAP, 3-18, 12-2, 13-9
Sappi Limited, 2-14
Satyan Computer Services, 2-4
Saudi Aramco, 15-2
Sepracor, Inc., 16-61
7-Eleven Stores, 18-45
Shanghai Electric Power, 6-10
Shareit Technology Holdings Inc., 17-21

--- Page 2351 ---
Showa Shell Sekiyu, 17-34
Siemens AG, 1-13, 2-9, 4-3, 4-16, 5-13, 11-21, 11-25, 13-15, 15-12, 16-
10, 17-33, 17-37, 24-12
Silver Fern Farms Limited, 5-13
Sinopec Group, 1-3, 5-28, 15-2
Sinovel Wind Group, 18-2
Skanska AB, 10-3
Snowflake Gelato, 18-45
Société Générale (SocGen), 5-29, 24-4, 24-34
Sony Corporation, 1-14, 3-19, 11-2, 16-9, 19-21
Sotheby’s Holdings, 8-8
Southwest, 3-23, 21-2
Sport 2000, 18-45
Sports Direct, 5-25
Sprint Nextel, 12-40
Starbucks, 10-3, 24-8
State Grid, 1-3, 15-2
Steinberger, 18-45
Steinhoff International, 24-4
STMicroelectronics (STM), 16-9
Stora Enso, 5-25, 21-36
Stoughton Trailers, 21-41, 21-44
Sunbeam, 3-70
Sunshine Mining, 14-2
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board, 12-2
Swatch, 18-45

--- Page 2352 ---
T
Tata Motors, 2-11, 18-10
Tata Steel, 10-2
Tate & Lyle, 9-23
TCBY, 18-45
Telecom Italia S.p.A., 14-4
Telefónica, S.A., 1-5, 23-3, 23-63–64
Tesco, 9-26, 22-3
Tesla Motors Inc., 16-9, 21-6, 23-2
Tiger Air, 14-24
Tomkins plc, 2-11
Total SA, 11-17, 13-16
Toyota Motor Company, 1-3, 1-5, 2-11, 2-14, 4-3, 7-20, 12-8, 12-18,
12-23, 13-16, 14-2, 15-2, 22-3
Toyota Motor Credit, 7-20
Trinity Biotech plc, 21-33
Tullow Oil plc, 11-20
Turquoise Hill Resources, 18-2
Twitter Inc., 16-9
U
Uber Technologies, 2-12, 17-2
UBS, 2-10, 24-8
Ultra Electronics Holdings, 18-36
Under Armour, 12-9, 15-5

--- Page 2353 ---
Unilever Group, 4-14, 7-19, 10-46, 10-47, 11-27
Union Planters, 17-74–75
United Business Media (UBM), 22-1
UnitedHealth Group, 1-3
United Utilities, 20-2
UPS Capital, 21-5
Urban Outfitters, 16-12
V
Valuation Resource Group (VRG), 6-2
Veolia Environment, 11-11
Vermont Teddy Bear Co., 23-67
Visa, 7-20
Vodafone Group plc, 4-9, 5-11, 13-8, 14-4, 15-5, 18-3, 20-2
Vodafone/Mannesmann, 1-24
Volkswagen AG, 1-3, 2-14, 12-18, 15-2, 24-9
Volvo, 2-14
VW Group, 19-19
W
W. T. Grant, 5-18, 23-2
Walmart, 1-3, 8-7, 9-16, 15-2, 16-12
Walt Disney Company, 14-7
Washington Mutual, 12-40, 14-24
Wayfair Inc., 18-22

--- Page 2354 ---
Wells Fargo, 17-2
Wesfarmers, 15-9
WeWork, 4-9
Wherehouse Entertainment Inc., 16-4
Wilmar International Limited, 13-29, 13-30, 13-31
Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc, 13-16, 19-23, 19-24, 19-25, 19-26,
20-29, 24-4, 24-17, 24-30
Woolworths Ltd., 5-29, 8-4
WorldCom Inc., 3-70, 10-22
X
Xerox, 3-70
Z
Zurich Insurance, 15-15

--- Page 2355 ---
Subject Index
A
Abnormal shortages, 9-20
Absences from employment, compensated, 13-13–14
Accelerated depreciation methods, 11-6
Account sales, 18-25
Account-form statement of financial position, 5-14

--- Page 2356 ---
Accounting
accrual-basis, 2-15–16, 3-37–39
agricultural, 9-8–9
asset-liability method, 19-27
average-cost method, 8-13–14, 17-14
basic assumptions, 2-13–16
basic principles, 2-16–21
book value method, 15-11, 16-6
cash-basis, 3-37–39, 3-41–42
cost-of-goods-sold method, 9-5, 9-6
criteria for making choices, 24-35
double-entry, 3-4
equity method, 17-13, 17-19–21, 23-23
fair value method, 16-13
first-in, first-out (FIFO) method, 8-14–16, 17-14
franchise, 18-45–47
gross profit method, 9-12–15
if-converted method, 16-25, 16-36
inventory, 8-1–2
last-in, first-out (LIFO) method, 8-16
loss method, 9-5, 9-6
management approach, 24-14
modified cash basis, 3-39
modified perpetual inventory system, 8-6
moving-average method, 8-14

--- Page 2357 ---
periodic inventory system, 8-5–6
perpetual inventory system, 8-4–6
share-option, 16-18
specific identification method, 8-13
strict cash basis, 3-37
tax, 19-3
transfers of receivables, 7-23
treasury-share method, 16-27–28, 16-35
with-and-without method, 16-4
Accounting changes
in accounting estimates, 4-19–20, 22-14–17, 22-21, 22-32
in accounting policy, 4-19, 22-3–14, 22-22
in accounting principle, 4-18–19, 4-20
background, 22-3
error correction, 22-17–22
global insights, 22-53–54
guidelines for, 22-21
reporting, 4-19–20
summary, 22-21–22
types of, 22-3
Accounting cycle
definition, 3-8–9
review, 3-44–45
steps, 3-8
summary, 3-34

--- Page 2358 ---
Accounting equation
basic, 3-5
definition, 3-4–6
expanded, 3-5
illustrations, 3-5
Accounting errors. See Errors
Accounting fraud, 24-34. See also Fraud; Fraudulent financial
reporting
Accounting information
comparability, 1-24, 2-11
completeness, 2-9
confirmatory value, 2-8
decision-useful, 1-7, 2-6
enhancing qualities, 2-10–12
faithful representation, 2-9–10, 3-8–9
forward-looking, 1-14
free from error, 2-10
materiality, 2-8
neutrality, 2-9–10
predictive value, 2-8
qualitative characteristics, 2-5, 2-6–12
relevance, 2-7–9, 3-8–9
supplementary, 2-21
timeliness, 1-14, 2-11
understandability, 2-11
verifiability, 2-11–12

--- Page 2359 ---
Accounting information systems
basic overview, 3-2–9
basic terminology, 3-3
definition, 3-2–3
global insights, 3-70–72
Accounting policies
changes in, 4-19, 22-3–14
definition, 5-24–25, 22-32
disclosure, 24-5–6
guidelines for selection, 22-5
illustrations, 5-25–26
notes to financial statements, 5-24–27, 24-5–6
summary, 5-25
Accounting principles
basic, 2-16–21
changes in, 4-18–19, 4-20
expense recognition, 2-20
fair value, 2-17
historical cost principle, 2-16
measurement principles, 2-16–18
revenue recognition, 2-19–20
Accounting standards
high-quality, 1-5
international, 1-9
international convergence, 1-15

--- Page 2360 ---
Accounts
chart of, 3-11, 3-12
definition, 3-3
nominal, 3-3
real, 3-3
Accounts payable
decrease in, 23-14
definition, 13-4
increase in, 23-11
Accounts receivable
aging schedule, 7-14
analysis of, 23-8–9
balances, 23-25
conversion of cash receipts to revenue, 3-39
decrease in, 23-11
definition, 7-6
direct method, 23-26
increase in, 23-8–9, 23-14
indirect method, 23-25–26
recognition of, 7-7
statement preparation, 23-25–26
temporary difference, 19-5
valuation of, 7-10–14
worksheet entries, 23-34

--- Page 2361 ---
Accounts receivable turnover
computation, 7-25
definition, 7-24
formula, 24-38
summary, 5-31
Accrual-basis accounting
assumption, 2-15–16
cash-basis accounting vs, 3-37–39
conversion from cash-basis to, 3-39–41
illustrations, 3-38, 23-21
Accruals
adjusting entries for, 3-24–28
reversing entries, 3-42–43
Accrued expenses
adjustment for, 3-25–28
definition, 3-19, 3-25
Accrued interest
adjustment for, 3-26
formula for computing interest for one month, 3-26
Accrued liabilities, 3-40
Accrued revenues
adjustment for, 3-25
definition, 3-19, 3-25
errors, 22-26
overstatement of, 22-26

--- Page 2362 ---
Accrued salaries and wages
adjustment for, 3-27–28
errors, 22-25
failure to record, 22-25
Accumulated benefit obligations, 20-6, 20-7, 20-26
Accumulated depreciation
increase in, 23-12, 23-14
statement of financial position presentation, 3-23
Accumulated other comprehensive income
computation, 20-21
definition, 5-11
presentation, 4-24
reporting, 20-21
Accumulated rights, 13-13
Accumulated value of annuity due, 6-18, 6-20
Accuracy, 2-10
Acid-test ratio
computation, 13-31
formula and use, 5-30, 13-31, 24-38
Activity method, depreciation, 11-5, 11-33
Activity ratios
definition, 5-30, 24-38, 24-49
formulas and use, 5-31, 24-38
Actuarial assumptions, 20-6
Actuarial present value, 20-6

--- Page 2363 ---
Actuaries, 20-6
Additions
accounting for, 10-23
definition, 10-20
property, plant, and equipment, 10-20–21
Adjunct accounts, 5-28
Adjustable-rate mortgages, 14-18
Adjusted market assessment approach, 18-15
Adjusted net income, 16-26
Adjusted subsequent events, 24-11
Adjusted trial balance
definition, 3-3, 3-29
illustration, 3-29, 3-30
preparation of statement of financial position from, 3-31
worksheets, 3-47

--- Page 2364 ---
Adjustments
for accruals, 3-24–28
additional, 23-16
for bad debts, 3-28, 22-27
to carrying value, 17-17
for deferrals, 3-19–24
definition, 3-3
for depreciation, 3-22
fair value. See Fair value adjustment
identifying and preparing, 3-18–29
for insurance, 3-20–21
for interest, 3-26
to net income, 23-22–25
note disclosure of, 17-30
prior period, 4-20
prospective, 4-19
reclassification, 17-29, 17-30
recycling, 17-27–30
retained earnings, 22-8–9, 22-12–13
retrospective, 4-19
types of, 3-19
worksheets, 3-46–47
Administrative expenses, 4-18
Adverse opinion, 24-24
Advertising costs, 12-22

--- Page 2365 ---
After costs, 13-18
Aging schedule, 7-13, 7-14
Agricultural accounting, 9-8–9
Agricultural produce, 9-8
Airplanes, 11-8
Allowances
definition, 7-9–10, 9-6
for doubtful accounts, 7-12, 23-25, 23-26
estimation of, 7-13–14
for inventory, 9-6
for purchases, 9-19
sales, 18-19–22
for uncollectible accounts, 7-11–14
Alternative performance measures
definition, 24-28
example, 24-28
presentation and disclosure, 24-28–29
reporting, 4-8–9
Alternative use test, 21-19, 21-21
examples, 21-40, 21-42, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sales-type leases, 21-22

--- Page 2366 ---
Amortization
adjustments to net income, 23-22–23
bond, 6-28–29
bond discount or premium, 14-8, 14-9, 14-19, 17-8, 23-23
calculation, 12-7
computation, 14-7
convertible bond, 16-6
after debt modification, 14-21
definition, 11-3, 12-4, 14-7
discount, 14-17
effective-interest, 6-28–29, 14-7–11, 14-28, 17-5, 17-6, 17-8
held-for-collection and selling (HFCS) investments, 17-8
held-for-collection (HFC) investments, 17-5, 17-6
intangible, 12-4–5, 12-7
lease, 21-43, 21-72
lease liability schedule, 21-40
lease schedule (lessee), 21-11, 21-13, 21-16
lease schedule (lessor), 21-23
limited-life intangible assets, 23-22
note discount, 14-13, 14-14
partial period interest, 14-11
premium, 14-10
present value, 14-7–11
residual value, 12-7
trademarks, 23-35

--- Page 2367 ---
Amortized cost
bond investments, 17-6
debt investments, 17-3–17-4, 17-5–7, 17-24–25, 17-78
definition, 17-3
impairment of value, 17-24–25
Annualized approach, 24-18
Annuities
deferred, 6-25–27
definition, 6-14, 6-32
future value, 6-14–20, 6-32
ordinary, 6-14, 6-32
present value, 6-20–25, 6-32
Annuity due
accumulated value of, 6-18, 6-20
definition, 6-14, 6-32
future value of, 6-17–18, 6-32
lease amortization based on, 21-16, 21-40, 21-43, 21-72
present value of, 6-22–23, 6-32
time diagrams, 6-18
Anticipated transactions, 17-41
Antidilution, 16-28–29
Antidilutive securities, 16-25, 16-28–29
Appropriated Retained Earnings, 4-21

--- Page 2368 ---
Arbitrageurs
definition, 17-33
derivatives use, 17-33–34
Arrears, 13-8
Articles of incorporation, 15-3
Articulation, 2-13
Artistic-related intangible assets, 12-7–8
Assessments, 13-17
Asset ceiling, 20-21
Asset turnover
computation, 11-25
formula, 24-38
illustration, 11-25
summary, 5-31
Asset-liability method
basic principles, 19-27
definition, 18-4, 19-27
for income taxes, 19-27
for revenue recognition, 18-29
Asset-linked bonds, 14-3

--- Page 2369 ---
Assets
agricultural, 9-8
to be disposed of, 11-15–16
biological, 9-8, 9-9
classification of, 17-3–17-4
contingent, 13-28–29
contract, 18-29–30
from contract costs, 18-33
current, 5-8–11
debt-to-assets ratio, 14-27
deferred tax, 19-4, 19-8, 19-9–10, 19-11–12, 19-28
definition, 2-12, 2-13, 2-41, 5-5
depreciable, 11-21–22
depreciable base, 11-3–4
economic factors, 11-4
exchanging, 14-19–20
fair value disclosure, 17-51–52
financial, 17-3–17-4
fixed, 10-2
gains and losses, 20-16
government grants adjusted to, 10-18, 10-19
historical cost reporting, 5-4
identifiable assets test, 24-15
impaired, 17-51–52
impairments, 11-12–16

--- Page 2370 ---
inadequacy, 11-4
intangible, 5-7, 12-2–5, 12-6–10, 23-22
lease, 21-7–9
lease types, 21-3
limited-life, 23-22
long-lived, 22-18
measurement of, 17-3–17-4
merchandising vs manufacturing companies, 8-3
misappropriation of, 24-34
non-current, 5-6–8, 6-4
non-monetary, 10-13–16
obsolescence, 11-4
other, 5-8
pension plan, 20-10–11, 20-16
physical factors, 11-4
plant, 10-2, 10-23–24
qualifying, 10-7
restatements, 22-18
return on, 11-25, 11-26
right-of-use, 21-29
sales of, 10-23–24
segment, 24-16
self-constructed, 10-5
service life estimation, 11-3–4
soft, 1-14

--- Page 2371 ---
statement of financial position, 5-5
supersession, 11-4
transfer, 14-20
Assumptions
basic review, 2-13–16
economic entity, 2-14
going concern, 2-14
monetary unit, 2-14–15
periodicity (or time period), 2-15
Assurance-type warranties. See also Warranties
accounting for, 13-19
definition, 13-18, 18-26
examples, 13-20, 18-27
Audit matters. See Key audit matters (KAMs)
Audit opinions
adverse, 24-24
auditor’s report, 24-21–24
disclaimer, 24-24
example, 24-21–22
modified, 24-23, 24-24
qualified, 24-23
unmodified or clean, 24-23
Auditor, 24-21

--- Page 2372 ---
Auditor’s report
definition, 24-21
examples, 24-21–22, 24-24
going concern, 24-23
key audit matters (KAMs), 24-24–25
major disclosures, 24-21–25
reporting standards, 24-22–23
Available-for-sale securities, 17-78
Average carrying amount, 10-8, 10-9
Average days to sell inventory, 9-23
Average-cost method. See also Cost flow
comparative balances, 8-21
comparative results, 8-16, 8-20
definition, 8-13
financial statements, 22-9
holdings of less than 20%, 17-14
for inventories, 8-13–14
moving-average method, 8-14
retained earnings statements, 22-12
weighted-average method, 8-13, 8-14
B
B shares, 15-5

--- Page 2373 ---
Bad debts
accounting for, 7-11–14
adjustment for, 3-28
direct method, 23-26
errors, 22-27
failure to adjust for, 22-27
Balance sheet, 5-3
Balance sheet report. See Statement of financial position
Bank accounts
cash controls with, 7-26–27
cash over and short, 7-28
general checking accounts, 7-27
imprest, 7-27
lockbox, 7-27
Bank charges, 7-29
Bank credits, 7-29
Bank errors, 7-29
Bank overdrafts
classification of, 7-5
definition, 7-4
reporting, 7-4–5
Bank reconciliation
definition, 7-29
form and content, 7-30
sample, 7-30

--- Page 2374 ---
Bank statements, 7-29
Banks, as lessors, 21-4–5
Bargain purchase, 12-13
Bargain purchase option
definition, 21-15, 21-20, 21-45
lessee accounting, 21-15, 21-45
Bargain renewal options, 21-7–8
Bargain renewal periods, 21-20
Barter, corporate, 9-15
Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS), 19-2
Basket purchases, 9-10
Bearer bonds, 14-3
Benefits/years-of-service method, 20-9
BEPS (base erosion and profit shifting), 19-2
Betterment. See Improvements
Bifurcation, 17-42
Bill-and-hold arrangements
definition, 18-24
example, 18-24
revenue recognition, 18-24, 18-29
Billings account, 18-38
Biological assets
definition, 9-8
illustration, 9-9
Bitcoin, 7-4–5

--- Page 2375 ---
Blockchain, 3-2
Bond discounts
amortization of, 6-28–29, 17-6, 23-23
computation, 6-28
Bond indenture, 14-4
Bond premiums, 14-9, 17-8, 23-23

--- Page 2376 ---
Bonds
asset-linked, 14-3
bearer, 14-3
call features, 14-4
callable, 14-3
commodity-backed, 14-3
convertible, 14-3, 16-3–4, 16-5–7, 16-9, 16-37, 16-59
coupon, 14-3
debenture, 14-3
deep-discount, 14-3
definition, 14-4
face value, 14-5
factors that affect prices, 14-4
gain on sale of, 17-7
income, 14-3
incremental effects, 16-37
issue A, 16-36, 16-37
issue B, 16-36, 16-37
issued at discount or premium, 14-6, 14-8, 14-11
issued at par, 14-5, 14-10
issued at premium, 14-9
issued between interest dates, 14-10–11
issuing, 14-4
junk, 14-3
long-term, 6-27–28, 14-2

--- Page 2377 ---
loss on redemption of, 14-19
loss on sale of, 17-9
maturity value, 14-5
100-year, 14-7
1,000-year, 14-7
par value, 14-5
principal amount, 14-5
redemption of, 14-19
registered, 14-3
reporting at amortized cost, 17-6
revenue, 14-3
secured, 14-3
serial, 14-3
term, 14-3
types of, 14-3, 14-28
unsecured, 14-3
valuation of, 6-27–28
zero-interest debenture, 14-3

--- Page 2378 ---
Bonds payable
accounting for, 14-4–7
decrease in, 23-15
discount on, 14-8
effective-interest amortization, 14-7–11
increase in, 23-12
premium on, 14-9
valuation, 14-4–7
Bonus payments, 22-22
Bonus plans, 13-14–15, 16-2–3
Book value
accounting method, 15-11, 16-6
definition, 3-23
after depreciation, 22-15
vs fair value, 10-16
Book value per share
computation, 15-26, 15-27–28
definition, 15-26
formula, 24-38
summary, 5-31
Boomerang sales, 18-22
Borrowing, secured, 7-22–23

--- Page 2379 ---
Borrowing costs
accounting for, 10-6
capitalization of, 10-6, 10-7–10
during construction, 10-6–10
disclosure of, 10-10
government grants for, 10-18–20
illustration, 10-8
summary, 10-10
total, 10-8
Borrowing rates. See also Interest rates
incremental, 21-9
Brands, valuable, 12-22–23
Bribery, 24-34
Broadcast license, 12-15
Buffett, Warren, 23-29
Buildings. See also Property, plant, and equipment
cost of, 10-4–5
depreciation, 23-35
increase in, 23-12
removal of old buildings, 10-4
Business combinations, 6-4, 12-3
Business organization
corporate form, 15-3–4
primary forms, 15-3
Buybacks, share, 15-11–15

--- Page 2380 ---
C
Call features, 14-4
Call options
accounting for, 17-35–37
definition, 17-35
Callable bonds, 14-3
Callable preference shares, 15-10
Capital
changes in, 23-27
complex, 16-20, 16-24, 16-29, 16-31
contributed (paid-in), 15-5
corporate, 15-3–11
earned, 15-5
earnings per share, 16-20–24, 16-29, 16-30, 16-31, 16-35
minimal, 15-16
simple, 16-20–24, 16-30, 16-35
working, 5-14, 15-16, 23-27
working capital ratio, 13-30
Capital allocation, 1-4–1-5
Capital expenditures, 10-2
Capital maintenance approach, 4-5
Capital structure, 22-22

--- Page 2381 ---
Capitalization
amount to capitalize, 10-7–10
of borrowing costs, 10-6, 10-7–10
of leases, 21-6, 21-7, 21-13
Capitalization period, 10-7
Capitalization rate, 10-9
Captive leasing companies, 21-5
Carrybacks, loss, 19-34–36
Carryforwards
definition, 19-27
loss, 19-18–21, 19-27
loss carryback with, 19-36
tax, 19-27
Carrying amount
average, 10-8, 10-9
presentation, 11-8
Carrying value. See also Book value
adjustment to, 17-17
definition, 3-23, 14-7
post-impairment, 12-15

--- Page 2382 ---
Cash
change in, 23-8, 23-11, 23-13
classification, 7-3, 7-5
current cash debt coverage, 5-22
definition, 5-10, 7-2–3, 23-5
extinguishment with, before maturity, 14-18–19
foreign balances, 7-1–2
global accounting insights, 7-56–57
imprest petty cash system, 7-27–28
investment by shareholders, 3-12
physical protection of, 7-28
receipt for future service, 3-13
receipt for services provided, 3-17
reporting, 7-3–5
restricted, 5-11, 7-4
statement of financial position presentation, 5-10–11
what counts for, 7-4–5
Cash and cash equivalents, 23-5. See also Cash; Cash equivalents
Cash controls, 7-26–27
Cash debt coverage
current, 5-22
definition, 5-22–23
formula, 5-23, 24-38
summary, 5-31
Cash deposits, returnable, 13-8

--- Page 2383 ---
Cash disbursements, 23-17
Cash discounts
definition, 7-8
for property, plant, and equipment, 10-11
recording, 7-8–9
Cash dividend payable, 13-8, 23-27
Cash dividends, 15-17–18
Cash equivalents
classification of, 7-5
definition, 5-16, 7-3, 23-5
reporting, 7-3
statement of cash flow presentation, 23-67
statement of financial position presentation, 5-10–11
Cash flow hedges
accounting for, 17-40–42
accounting summary, 17-44
Cash flow risk, 17-40
Cash flow statement. See Statement of cash flows

--- Page 2384 ---
Cash flows
classification, 23-3–5
effects of hedges on, 17-41
evaluation, 23-5
expected, 6-29, 6-30
free, 5-23–24
inflows and outflows, 5-17, 23-4, 23-27
investment, 17-24
net cash flow from investing and financing activities, 23-9, 23-11–
12, 23-15
net cash flow from operating activities, 23-8–9, 23-11, 23-12, 23-
16–21
present value of, 6-30
reporting, 23-1–2
typical inflows and outflows, 23-4
Cash operating return on assets (COROA), 23-29–30
Cash over and short accounts, 7-28
Cash payments
conversion to expenses, 3-40, 3-41
for income taxes, 23-20
major classes, 23-18
for operating expenses, 23-20
statement of cash receipts and disbursements, 3-41
to suppliers, 23-19–20
Cash realizable value, 7-11
Cash rebates, 13-20

--- Page 2385 ---
Cash receipts
conversion to revenue, 3-39, 3-40
from customers, 23-18–19
major classes, 23-18
statement of cash receipts and disbursements, 3-41
Cash sales with returns and allowances, 18-21–22
Cash-basis accounting
vs accrual-basis accounting, 3-37–39
conversion to accrual-basis, 3-39–41
illustrations, 3-38, 23-21
modified cash basis, 3-39
strict cash basis, 3-37
theoretical weaknesses, 3-41–42
Cash-generating units (CGUs)
definition, 11-15
identification, 12-16
Certainty, virtual, 13-29
Change funds
classification of, 7-5
reporting, 7-3
Change management, 3-18

--- Page 2386 ---
Changes in accounting estimates, 22-14–17
definition, 22-32
depreciation after, 22-15
disclosures, 22-17
due to error, 22-21
impact on income, 22-16
prospective reporting, 22-15–16
reporting, 4-19–20
summary, 4-20
summary guidelines, 22-21
top 10 categories of, 22-16
Changes in accounting policy
cumulative effect, 22-4
definition, 4-19, 22-3–4
direct effects, 22-13, 22-32
disclosure, 24-7
disclosure requirements, 22-7
examples, 22-3–4, 22-6, 22-7
indirect effects, 22-13–14, 22-33
motivation for, 22-22
prospective, 22-4
reporting, 4-19, 22-4–5, 22-12–13
retrospective approach, 22-4–13
summary guidelines, 22-21

--- Page 2387 ---
Changes in accounting principle
calculation, 4-19
definition, 4-18–19
income statement presentation, 4-19
reporting, 4-19
summary, 4-20
Changes in cash, 23-8, 23-11, 23-13
Changes in deferred income taxes, 23-23
Changes in equity, 4-23–24
Changes in estimated useful lives, 22-17
Changes in retained earnings, 23-32–34
Changes in working capital, 23-27
Charges
bank, 7-29
non-cash, 23-36
Chart of accounts, 3-11, 3-12
Claims
creditor, 24-7
equityholders’, 24-7
litigation, 13-17, 13-18
Classified report-form statement of financial position, 5-15
Closing, 3-30–33

--- Page 2388 ---
Closing entries
definition, 3-3, 3-30
financial statement preparation from, 3-30–32
journalized, 3-31
for merchandising companies, 3-37
posting, 3-32–33
Closing process, 3-30
Collectibility, 18-33
Collection float, 7-27
Combined statement of income and retained earnings, 23-33
Commercial substance, 10-13–14
Commitments, 24-7
Commodity broker-traders, 9-9–10
Commodity-backed bonds, 14-3
Common costs, 24-15
Common shares, 5-11
Common-size analysis, 24-41–42
Company bonds, 14-4
Company equity grants, 16-12
Comparability, 1-24, 2-11, 22-2
Comparability challenges, 22-5
Comparative analysis, 24-40, 24-49

--- Page 2389 ---
Comparative income statements
cost-recovery vs percentage-of-completion methods, 22-6
error correction comparison, 22-18
related to accounting change (percentage-of-completion), 22-7
reporting errors, 22-20
retained earnings adjustments, 22-8
Comparative statements of financial position, 5-24, 23-6
condensed, 24-40
definition, 23-6
illustrations, 5-19, 17-28, 23-7, 23-10, 23-13, 23-32, 24-40
reporting errors, 22-20
Compensated absences, 13-13–14
Compensating balances
classification, 7-5
definition, 7-4

--- Page 2390 ---
Compensation
adjustments to net income, 23-24–25
disclosure of plans, 16-18
employee share-purchase plans (ESPPs), 16-17–18
employee stock-purchase plans, 16-60
executive pay packages, 16-2–3
expense allocation, 16-14
restricted-share plans, 16-16–17, 16-18, 16-19
share options, 16-10, 16-12, 16-14
share-appreciation rights, 16-33
share-based, 6-4, 16-12–19, 23-24–25
Completeness, 2-9
Complex capital
definition, 16-20, 16-24
earnings per share (EPS), 16-29, 16-31
Component depreciation, 11-8, 11-33, 24-36
Compound instruments, 16-4

--- Page 2391 ---
Compound interest
accumulation of amounts, 6-7
compounding frequency, 6-8
compounding periods, 6-8
computation, 6-5–8
continuous compounding, 6-7
definition, 6-32
fundamental variables, 6-8–9
vs simple interest, 6-5
Compound interest tables, 6-6–8
Compound securities, 24-46
Comprehensive income
computation, 20-20
definition, 2-41, 4-22
other, 4-22
reporting, 20-21
total, 24-47
types of restatements, 22-18
Comprehensive income statements, 4-21–23
definition, 4-3
one statement approach, 4-22
two statement approach, 4-22, 4-23
Comprehensive statement of cash flows, 5-21

--- Page 2392 ---
Conceptual framework
basic elements, 2-12–13
basic objective, 2-5–6
definition, 2-3
development of, 2-4
global insights, 2-39–41
need for, 2-3–4
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting
assumptions, 2-13–16
basic objective, 2-5–6
basic principles, 2-16–21
definition, 1-11
development of, 2-4
fundamental concepts, 2-6–13
illustration, 2-5, 2-23
overview, 2-5
structure, 2-23
summary, 2-23
Condensed comparative financial information, 24-40
Condensed income statements, 4-8
Conditional expenses, 13-15
Confirmatory value, 2-8
Conglomerate (diversified) companies, 24-12–16
Conservatism, 2-22
Consideration payable, 13-20, 13-21

--- Page 2393 ---
Consigned goods, 8-8
Consignee, 18-25
Consignment
definition, 8-8, 18-25
revenue recognition, 18-25–26, 18-29
sales on, 18-26
Consignor, 18-25
Consistency, 2-11, 5-29, 22-2
challenges, 22-5
lack of, 24-23
Consolidated statements, 17-13
definition, 17-21
income effects, 17-22
summary, 17-22
Construction
borrowing costs during, 10-6–10
long-term contracts, 18-35–44
self-constructed assets, 10-5
Construction in Process account, 18-38, 18-44
Constructive obligations, 13-16
Consumers, 17-33
Contingencies
accounting for, 13-27–29
disclosures, 24-7
types of restatements, 22-18

--- Page 2394 ---
Contingent assets, 13-28–29
Contingent liabilities, 13-27–28
Contingently issuable ordinary shares, 16-28
Contingently issuable shares, 16-28
Continuing franchise fees, 18-46
Continuing operations, 4-14
Continuous compounding, 6-7
Contra accounts, 5-28
Contra asset accounts, 3-23
Contra items, 5-28
Contract acquisition costs, 18-32
Contract assets
recognition and presentation, 18-30
types of, 18-29–30
Contract balances, 18-33
Contract costs
assets recognized from, 18-33
recognition of, 18-32
revenue disclosure requirements, 18-33
Contract liabilities
definition, 18-30
example, 18-31
recognition and presentation, 18-30
Contract modifications, 18-31–32
Contract services, 12-20

--- Page 2395 ---
Contract-related intangible assets, 12-8
Contracts
with customers, 18-5–6, 18-9–10, 18-33
deferred-payment, 10-11–12
executory, 21-7
forward, 17-32, 17-40
futures, 17-40–41
long-term, 18-35–44, 22-6–7
onerous, 9-11, 13-24
retrospective accounting change, 22-6–7
and revenue recognition, 18-9–10
signing, 3-15
unprofitable, 18-43–44
Contributed (paid-in) capital, 15-5
Contributory pension plans, 20-3
Control: transfer of, 18-29
Control indicators, 18-17
Controlling interest, 17-21
Conventional retail inventory method, 9-16–19

--- Page 2396 ---
Convertible bonds
accounting for, 16-59
amortization schedule, 16-6
conversion at maturity, 16-6
conversion before maturity, 16-6
definition, 14-3, 16-3–4
equity component, 16-5, 16-7
incremental effects, 16-37
liability component fair value, 16-5
market wave, 16-9
repurchase at maturity, 16-6
repurchase before maturity, 16-6–7
settlement of, 16-5–7
time diagram for, 16-5
Convertible debt
accounting for, 16-3–8
components of, 16-4
induced conversions, 16-7–8
with-and-without method, 16-4
Convertible preference shares
accounting for, 16-8–9
definition, 15-10, 16-8
features of, 15-10
incremental effects, 16-37
Convertible securities, 16-25–26

--- Page 2397 ---
Copyright, 12-7
COROA (cash operating return on assets), 23-29–30
Corporate barter, 9-15
Corporate capital, 15-3–11
Corporate form
characteristics of, 15-3–4
corporate law and, 15-3
ownership interests, 15-4
share system, 15-3–4
Corporate income tax rates, 19-18
Corporate law, 15-3
Corrections of errors
accounting for, 22-17–22
error entries, 22-19
example, 22-18–21
preparation of financial statements with, 22-30–31
reporting, 4-20
summary, 4-20, 22-21–22
Corruption, 24-34
Cost constraint, 2-21–22
Cost depletion, 11-18–19

--- Page 2398 ---
Cost flow
assumptions to adopt, 8-12–16
inventory, 8-4–6, 8-12–16
last-in, first-out (LIFO) assumption, 8-19
through manufacturing vs merchandising companies, 8-4
Cost method
purchase of treasury shares, 15-12
retail inventory method including markdowns, 9-18
Cost-basis approach, 8-1–42
Cost-of-goods-sold method, 9-5, 9-6
Cost-recovery (zero-profit) method
financial statement presentation, 18-41
illustration, 18-40–41
journal entries, 18-41
for long-term contracts, 18-40–41, 22-6
for losses on unprofitable contracts, 18-44
vs percentage-of-completion method, 22-6

--- Page 2399 ---
Costs
after, 13-18
advertising, 12-22
allocation of, 9-10, 11-3–7
amortized, 17-3–17-4, 17-5–7
average-cost method, 8-13–14
borrowing, 10-6–10, 10-18–20
of buildings, 10-4–5
common, 24-15
computation, 10-15
contract, 18-32, 18-33
contract fulfillment, 18-32
current, 2-18
deemed, 24-46
development, 11-18, 24-36
executory, 21-28
exploratory and evaluation (E&E), 11-17–18, 11-20
financing, 4-12, 4-18, 8-11
freight, 9-19
fulfillment, 18-32
of goods available for sale or use, 8-7
of goods sold, 4-18, 8-7
historical, 5-4, 10-3
historical cost principle, 2-16
included/excluded from restructuring provisions, 13-25

--- Page 2400 ---
indirect, 12-20
initial operating losses, 12-22
interest, 8-11
inventory, 8-10–12
of issuing shares, 15-9
of land, 10-4
through merchandising vs manufacturing companies, 8-4
organizational, 12-21
other, 8-10
percentage markup on, 9-14
period, 8-11, 8-22
postretirement benefit, 23-23
post-sale, 13-18
pre-exploratory, 11-17
product, 8-10, 8-22
property, plant, and equipment, 10-3
of purchase, 8-10
rearrangement and reorganization, 10-21
with relative standalone sales value, 9-10
research and development (R&D), 12-18–23
resource, 11-18–19
restoration, 11-18
right-of-use, 21-29–30
semi-truck, 10-15
similar to R&D costs, 12-21–22

--- Page 2401 ---
start-up, 12-21–22
subsequent to acquisition, 10-20–23
Cost-to-cost method
definition, 18-35, 18-36
example, 18-36–38
formula for amount of current-period revenue, 18-36
formula for percentage-of-completion, 18-36
formula for total revenue to be recognized to date, 18-36
journal entries, 18-37, 18-38
Cost-to-retail ratio
illustrations, 9-16, 9-18
markdowns included in, 9-18
markdowns not included in, 9-18
Counterbalancing errors
analysis of, 22-24–26, 22-32
definition, 22-24
examples, 22-25–26
Counterparties, 17-35
Coupon bonds, 14-3
Coupon rate, 14-5
Coupons, printed, 13-20
Coverage ratios
definition, 5-30, 24-38, 24-49
formulas and use, 5-31, 24-38
Credit purchase of supplies, 3-15

--- Page 2402 ---
Credit risk, 17-26
Credit risk rate of interest, 6-29
Credit sales, 18-20–21
Creditor claims, 24-7
Creditors, 1-6
Credits
bank, 7-29
debit/credit rules and effects, 3-5
definition, 3-4
non-cash, 23-36
Crime, economic, 24-34
Cross-referencing and contra items, 5-28
Cryptocurrencies, 7-4–5
Cumulative effect, 22-4
Cumulative preference shares, 15-10
Cumulative temporary differences, 19-16
Current assets
definition, 5-8
illustration, 5-8
presentation, 5-8–11, 13-30
statement of financial position presentation, 5-8–11
valuation basis, 5-8
Current cash debt coverage
formula, 5-22, 24-38
summary, 5-31

--- Page 2403 ---
Current cost, 2-18
Current income statement, 23-7
Current liabilities, 13-3–15
accounts payable, 13-4
analysis of, 13-30–31
current maturities of long-term debt, 13-6
current ratio, 5-30
definition, 5-13–14
dividends payable, 13-8
employee-related, 13-12–15, 13-32
financial statements, 13-9
income taxes payable, 13-11–12
notes payable, 13-4–6
operating cycle, 13-4
payroll, 13-12
presentation, 13-29–30
reporting of, 13-4, 13-32
returnable cash deposits, 13-8
sales taxes payable, 13-10
short-term debts expected to be refinanced, 13-6–7, 13-32
statement of financial position, 5-13
types of, 13-4, 13-32
unearned revenues, 13-8–9
value-added taxes payable, 13-10–11
Current maturities of long-term debt, 13-6

--- Page 2404 ---
Current ratio
computation, 13-31
definition, 13-30
formula and use, 5-30, 13-30, 24-38
Current receivables, 7-6
Current reporting issues, 24-31–36
Current tax benefits, 19-36
Current tax expenses, 19-6, 19-27
Current value, 2-16
Curtailment, 20-14
Customer-related intangible assets, 12-6–7
Customers
cash receipts from, 23-18–19
consideration paid or payable to, 18-14
contracts with, 18-33
major, 24-16
Cybercrime, 24-34
D
Debenture bonds, 14-3
Debit/credit rules and effects, 3-5
Debits, 3-4

--- Page 2405 ---
Debt
cash, 5-22–23
convertible, 16-3–8
current cash, 5-22
current maturities, 13-6
equity and, 16-3
extinguishment of, 14-18
induced conversions, 16-7–8
long-term, 13-6, 14-3, 14-26, 14-27, 14-28
ratios, 14-27
short-term, 13-6–7, 13-32

--- Page 2406 ---
Debt investments
accounting for, 17-4–12, 17-22, 17-78
amortized cost, 17-3–4, 17-5–7, 17-24–25, 17-78
categories, 17-4–5
classification of, 17-4, 17-78
example, 17-5–7
fair value, 17-4, 17-12, 17-25–27, 17-78
global insights, 17-77–78
held-for-collection (HFC), 17-5–7, 17-22
held-for-collection and selling (HFCS), 17-7–10, 17-22, 17-25–27,
17-29
impairment of, 17-24–27
impairment of value, 17-24–25
measurement of, 17-3–17-4
reclassification adjustment, 17-29
summary of approaches, 17-78
trading, 17-11, 17-22
Debt modification, 14-21
Debt securities
accounting for, 17-78
available-for-sale, 17-78
classification, 17-78
definition, 17-4
global insights, 17-77–78
held-to-maturity, 17-78
trading, 17-78

--- Page 2407 ---
Debt-to-assets ratio
computation, 14-27
formula and use, 5-31, 24-38
Decision-usefulness, 1-7, 2-6
Declining-balance method, 11-7
Decreasing-charge methods, 11-33
Deductible amounts, 19-5
Deductible temporary differences, 19-13, 19-28
Deemed cost, 24-46
Deep-discount bonds, 14-3
Deferrals
adjusting entries, 3-19–24
reversing entries, 3-43–44
tax amounts, 19-4
types of, 3-19
Deferred annuities
definition, 6-25
future value of, 6-25–26
present value of, 6-26–27
Deferred income disclosure, 10-19

--- Page 2408 ---
Deferred income taxes
changes in, 23-23
computation, 19-27
examples, 19-29–30, 19-33
financial statement presentation, 19-22–27
key terms, 19-27–28
reporting, 19-27
Deferred revenue, 10-18
Deferred tax assets
accounting for, 19-4, 19-9–10
classification, 19-31, 19-34
computation, 19-9
definition, 19-9, 19-28
disclosure, 19-12
future, 19-8
income statement presentation, 19-11
non-recognition, 19-11–12
as real assets, 19-11
after reversals, 19-11
statement of financial position presentation, 19-10
Deferred tax benefits, 19-10, 19-36
Deferred tax consequences, 19-28

--- Page 2409 ---
Deferred tax expenses
benefit, 19-28, 19-30–31, 19-33–34
computation, 19-30–31, 19-33–34
definition, 19-6, 19-28
Deferred tax liabilities
based on future tax rates, 19-17
classification, 19-31, 19-34
computation, 19-6
definition, 19-4, 19-5, 19-28
as real liabilities, 19-8
after reversals, 19-7
statement of financial position presentation, 19-7
Deferred taxes
disclosures, 24-7
financial statement presentation, 19-10
future deductible amounts and, 19-8–11
future taxable amounts and, 19-5–8
statement of financial position presentation, 19-34
U.S. GAAP/IFRS differences, 19-59
Deferred-payment contracts, 10-11–12
Defined benefit obligation
balance, 20-17
definition, 20-6, 20-26
net, 20-7
reporting changes in, 20-8–10

--- Page 2410 ---
Defined benefit plans
accounting for, 20-4–5
definition, 20-4, 20-26
disclosure requirements, 20-22
risks, 20-5
Defined contribution plans
accounting for, 20-4
definition, 20-4, 20-25–26
employer-sponsored, 20-5
Depletion
definition, 11-3, 11-17
of mineral resources, 11-16–20, 23-22
Depletion base
computation, 11-17
establishment of, 11-17–18
Depletion rate, 11-18
Depositor errors, 7-29
Deposits
legally restricted, 7-4
returnable cash deposits, 13-8
in transit, 7-29
Depreciable assets
revaluation of, 11-21–22, 11-29–32
valuation decrease below historical cost, 11-30–31
valuation increase, 11-29–30

--- Page 2411 ---
Depreciable base, 11-3–4

--- Page 2412 ---
Depreciation
accelerated, 11-6
accounting for, 11-3–7
accumulated, 3-23, 23-11, 23-12, 23-35
activity method, 11-5, 11-33
adjustment for, 3-22, 23-22–23
book value after, 22-15
building, 23-35
calculation, 11-5, 11-6
after change in estimate, 22-15
choices, 11-11
component, 11-8, 11-33, 24-36
declining-balance method, 11-7
decreasing-charge methods, 11-33
definition, 11-3
diminishing-charge methods, 11-6–7
double-declining schedule, 11-7
equipment, 23-35
errors, 22-26
factors involved, 11-3–4
failure to record, 22-26
fractional-year, 11-9, 11-10
increase in, 23-11, 23-12
methods of, 11-4–7, 11-33
partial-period, 11-9, 11-33

--- Page 2413 ---
property, plant, and equipment, 11-10
statement of financial position presentation, 3-23
straight-line method, 11-6, 11-33
sum-of-the-years’-digits method, 11-6
sum-of-the-years’-digits schedule, 11-7
worksheet entries, 23-35
Depreciation expenses, 23-11, 23-14
Depreciation periods, 11-10
Depreciation rates, 11-10–11, 11-33
Derecognition
definition, 2-18, 7-23
receivables, 7-19–23

--- Page 2414 ---
Derivative instruments
accounting, 17-32, 17-34–42
accounting entries, 17-35–37
accounting summary, 17-44
arbitrageurs, use of, 17-33–34
basic characteristics, 17-37
basic principles, 17-34–37
consumers, use of, 17-33
controversy, 17-48–49
definition, 17-32
embedded, 17-42–43
examples, 17-32
forward contract, 17-32
guidelines for, 17-34
for hedging, 17-37–42, 17-44
notional amount, 17-37
option contract, 17-32
producers, use of, 17-33
reporting issues, 17-42–44
risk, 17-38
speculation, 17-35–37, 17-44
speculators, use of, 17-33–34
summary, 17-44
vs traditional instruments, 17-37
underlying, 17-37

--- Page 2415 ---
who uses and why, 17-33–34
Derivatives. See Derivative instruments
Designation, 17-43
Destination points, 8-8
Development activities, 12-19
Development costs. See also Research and development (R&D)
costs
convergence and, 24-36
parts of, 11-18
Development phase, 12-3
Development stage, 12-3
Differential disclosure, 24-5

--- Page 2416 ---
Diluted earnings per share (EPS)
basic EPS and, 16-25
comprehensive example, 16-35–38
computation, 16-24–32
computation steps, 16-35
convertible securities, 16-25–26
definition, 16-24
options and warrants, 16-27–28
per share effect of issue A bonds, 16-36
per share effect of issue B bonds, 16-36
per share effect of options, 16-35
per share effect of 10% convertible preference shares, 16-36
ranking of per share effects, 16-36
reconciliation, 16-30
reporting, 16-20
Dilutive securities
accounting for, 16-3–9
definition, 16-24
global insights, 16-59–60
Diminishing-charge methods, 11-6–7
Direct effects of change in accounting policy, 22-13, 22-32

--- Page 2417 ---
Direct method
computation, 23-17
definition, 23-17
example, 23-17–20
net cash flow from operating activities, 23-16–21
summary, 23-20–21
support for, 23-21–22
Direct write-off method, 7-11
Disaggregated information, 24-16
Disclaimer of an opinion, 24-24

--- Page 2418 ---
Disclosures
accounting policies, 24-5–6
borrowing costs, 10-10
changes in accounting estimates, 22-17
changes in accounting policy, 22-7, 24-7
changes in estimated useful lives, 22-17
compensation plans, 16-18
contingencies and commitments, 24-7
contingent liability, 13-28
creditor claims, 24-7
cross-referencing and contra items, 5-28
deferred tax asset, 19-12
deferred taxes, pensions, and leases, 24-7
definition, 6-4
differential, 24-5
earnings per share, 16-26, 16-29–30
equityholders’ claims, 24-7
errors, 24-9–10
events after the reporting period, 24-10–12
examples, 23-29, 24-6, 24-12
fair value, 17-48–49, 24-7
first-time adoption of IFRS, 24-46
fraud, 24-9–10
full disclosure principle, 2-20–21, 24-3–7
global insights, 24-69–71

--- Page 2419 ---
heart of the matter, 24-26
interest, taxes, and dividends, 23-29
interim reports, 24-17–18
inventory, 24-7
inventory methods, 9-21
issues, 24-8–20
lease, 21-31–33
litigation, 13-18
long-term debt, 14-26
note, 23-29, 24-4–6, 24-8
overload, 24-36
parenthetical explanations, 5-27–28
pension, 20-22, 20-23
property, plant, and equipment, 24-7
provisions, 13-26–27
receivables, 7-25
related-party transactions, 24-8–9
restrictions on retained earnings, 15-23
revenue recognition, 18-33–34
segmented, 24-12, 24-13, 24-14, 24-16
share-option plan, 16-18, 16-19
significant non-cash transactions, 23-28
special disclosures, 23-28–29
special transactions or events, 24-8–10
subsequent events, 24-10–12

--- Page 2420 ---
tax reconciliation, 19-25
techniques of, 5-27–28
Discontinued operations
definition, 4-14
EPS presentation, 16-29
EPS with gain on, 16-24
gain, 4-16, 16-24
income statement presentation, 4-14
loss, 4-16
reporting, 4-14
summary, 4-18
Discount rate
definition, 20-9–10, 21-20
lease payments, 21-9
present value test, 21-20
Discounting, 6-9
Discounts
bonds issued at, 14-6, 14-8, 14-11
cash, 7-8–9, 10-11
employee, 9-20
notes payable, 14-16
purchase, 8-11–12, 9-19
sales, 9-19
volume, 18-14
Discrete approach, 24-17, 24-19, 24-20

--- Page 2421 ---
Disposition
gains on disposal of used trucks, 10-16
losses on disposal of used machines, 10-15
property, plant, and equipment, 10-23–24
Distributions to owners, 2-41
Diversified (conglomerate) companies, 24-12–16
Dividend policy, 15-15–22
Dividend preferences, 15-26–27
Dividends
cash, 15-17–18
declaration and payment of, 3-16
declared, 15-17
distributions, 15-16
effects on financial statement elements, 15-22
in kind, 15-18
liquidating, 11-19–20, 15-17, 15-19–20
note disclosure of, 23-29
preference, in arrears, 13-8
preference share, 16-21
property, 15-18, 15-19
reporting, 23-29
retained, 15-23
share, 13-8, 15-20–21, 15-22, 16-22–23
types of, 15-16–20
Dividends in arrears, 15-10

--- Page 2422 ---
Dividends payable, 13-8
Documentation
hedging, 17-43
pension worksheets, 20-11–13
Double-declining balance depreciation method, 11-7
Double-entry accounting, 3-4
Doubtful accounts: allowance for
definition, 7-12
net approach, 23-26
presentation, 7-12, 23-25
Due process, 1-9–1-10
E
Earned capital, 15-5
Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA), 21-18, 21-34
Earnings management. See also Retained earnings
concerns about, 4-5
definition, 4-4
quality of earnings and, 4-3–4
smooth earnings, 22-22
use of, 4-4

--- Page 2423 ---
Earnings per share
basic, 16-20–24
complex capital structure, 16-29, 16-31
components, 16-20
comprehensive examples, 16-34–38
computation, 4-13
computation illustrations, 16-30, 16-31, 16-35
computation summary, 16-30–31
definition, 4-13, 16-20
diluted, 16-20, 16-24–32
disclosure, 16-26, 16-29–30
formula, 16-21, 24-38
with gain on discontinued operations, 16-24
global insights, 16-59–60
if-converted method, 16-25–26, 16-36
income statement presentation, 16-20, 16-37
presentation, 16-29–30
recomputation with incremental effect of convertible bonds, 16-37
recomputation with incremental effect of convertible preference
shares, 16-37
recomputation with incremental effect of options, 16-36
reconciliation, 16-30
reporting, 4-13
simple capital structure, 16-20–24, 16-30, 16-35
summary, 4-18, 5-31
treasury-share method, 16-27–28, 16-35

--- Page 2424 ---
EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization), 21-18, 21-34
Economic consequences
of accounting rules, 1-12–13
definition, 22-22
Economic crime, 24-34
Economic entity assumption, 2-14
Economic viability, 12-4, 12-43
Effective rate, 6-7
Effective yield, 6-8, 14-6
Effective-interest method
bond discounts or premiums, 6-28–29, 14-28, 17-6, 17-8
bonds payable, 14-7–11, 14-28
held-for-collection (HFC) investments, 17-5, 17-6
lessee accounting, 21-9–12
note discounts, 7-17, 7-18, 14-13
Effective-interest rate, 6-24
Effectiveness, 17-43
Elective exemptions, 24-45–46
Embedded derivatives, 17-42–43
Employee benefits
bonus payments, 13-14–15
postemployment, 13-13
postretirement, 13-14
share compensation plans, 16-12–19
share options, 16-10, 16-12

--- Page 2425 ---
Employee discounts, 9-20
Employee payroll deductions, 13-13
Employee share-purchase plans (ESPPs), 16-17–18
Employee stock-purchase plans, 16-60
Employee-related liabilities, 13-12–15, 13-32
Employer-sponsored defined contribution plans, 20-5
Employment
compensated absences, 13-13–14
postemployment benefits, 13-13
postretirement benefits, 13-14
Ending inventory
errors, 8-17–18
gross profit estimation method, 9-12–15
retail, 9-15–20
Enhancing qualities, 2-10–12
Entity perspective, 1-6–1-7
Environmental liabilities
allocation of, 13-22
definition, 6-4
example provisions, 13-22–23
measurement of, 13-22
obligating event, 13-22
recognition of, 13-22
Environmental provisions, 13-22–24
EPS. See Earnings per share

--- Page 2426 ---
Equipment. See also Property, plant, and equipment
cost of, 10-5
increase in, 23-12
loss on sale of, 23-14
net cash flow from, 23-15
office equipment purchases, 3-13
R&D costs, 12-20
worksheet entries, 23-35

--- Page 2427 ---
Equity
analysis of, 15-24–26
categories of, 15-5
company grants, 16-12
components of, 15-5
comprehensive presentation, 15-23
convertible bond component, 16-5, 16-7
debt and, 16-3
definition, 2-13, 2-41, 5-5, 5-11–12, 15-5
global insights, 15-48–50
induced conversions to, 16-7–8
non-trading, 5-6
presentation, 15-22–24
reconciling items for, 24-47
related equity statements, 4-21–24
return on, 15-25
security issue component, 16-10
shareholders’, 5-11, 20-24
statement of changes in, 4-23–24, 15-24, 17-28
statement of financial position, 5-5, 5-12
trading on, 15-25
with treasury shares, 15-13
types of restatements, 22-18
Equity accounts, 3-7
Equity awards, 16-32

--- Page 2428 ---
Equity interest, 14-20
Equity investments
accounting for, 17-13–22
adjustment to carrying value, 17-17
classification of, 17-4, 17-13
consolidated statements, 17-13
definition, 17-13
exchange for non-cash consideration, 17-14
fair value, 17-17
fair value adjustment, 17-15, 17-16
financial statement presentation, 17-17
gain on sale, 17-15
global insights, 17-77
holdings between 20% and 50%, 17-19–21
holdings less than 20%, 17-14–18, 17-22
holdings more than 50%, 17-21
measurement of, 17-4
non-trading, 17-14, 17-16–18, 17-22, 17-77, 23-27
reporting, 17-13
short-term non-trading, 23-27
summary of approaches, 17-78
trading, 17-14–16
worksheet entries, 23-34
Equity investors, 1-6
Equity kickers, 16-9

--- Page 2429 ---
Equity method
accounting, 17-19–21
adjustments to net income, 23-23
definition, 17-13, 17-19
vs fair value method, 17-20
summary, 17-22
Equity relationships, 3-7
Equityholders’ claims, 24-7
Error analysis, 22-23–31
global insights, 22-53–54
worksheet, 22-30
Error correction
accounting for, 22-17–22
disclosure, 24-36
financial statement preparation, 22-30–31
prior period adjustments, 4-20
worksheet, 22-29

--- Page 2430 ---
Errors
accrued revenue, 22-26
accrued wages, 22-25
bad debts, 22-27
bank errors, 7-29
comprehensive example, 22-27–29
correction of, 22-17–22
counterbalancing, 22-24–26, 22-32
definition, 22-32, 24-9
depreciation, 22-26
disclosure of, 22-20, 24-9–10
entries for, 22-19
in financial statements, 22-3
free from error, 2-10
guidelines for, 22-21
income statement, 22-23, 22-32
income statement effects, 22-19
inventory, 8-17–19
major categories that drive restatements, 22-18
non-counterbalancing, 22-24, 22-26–27, 22-32
numerous, 22-27–29
prepaid expenses, 22-25
prior period adjustments, 22-18
purchases, 22-26
reporting, 4-18–20, 22-19

--- Page 2431 ---
statement of financial position, 22-23, 22-32
statement of financial position and income statement, 22-24–27,
22-32
statement of financial position effects, 22-19
types of, 22-17, 22-32
unearned revenues, 22-25
ESPPs (employee share-purchase plans), 16-17–18
Estimated liabilities, 13-15
Estimated uncollectibles, 7-11–12
Estimates
changes in, 4-19–20, 22-3, 22-17
critical, 9-2
limitations of, 5-4
Ethics, 1-14–15
European Commission, 1-2
Events
definition, 3-3
identifying and recording, 3-8–9
post-balance-sheet, 24-70
after the reporting period, 24-10–12
special, 24-8–10
subsequent, 24-10–12, 24-70–71
Exchange rate risk, 17-38

--- Page 2432 ---
Exchanges
accounting for, 10-14, 10-15–16
of commercial substance, 10-13, 10-14–16
gains, 10-15–16
losses, 10-14–15
of non-monetary assets, 10-13–16
that lack commercial substance, 10-16
Executive pay
packages, 16-2–3
share compensation plans, 16-12–19
share options, 16-10, 16-12
Executory costs, 21-28
Exercise price, 17-35
Expectations gap, 1-13
Expected cash flow approach
definition, 6-29
example, 6-30
Expected cost plus a margin approach, 18-15
Expected inflation rate of interest, 6-29
Expenditures
allocation of, 10-10
major types of, 10-20

--- Page 2433 ---
Expense recognition
principle of, 2-20
procedures for product and period costs, 2-20
types of restatements, 22-18

--- Page 2434 ---
Expenses
accrued, 3-19
administrative, 4-18
allocation of, 16-14
cash payments for, 23-20
classification of, 4-9–11
compensation, 16-14, 16-33
conversion of cash payments to, 3-40
current tax, 19-27
deferred tax, 19-6
definition, 2-13, 2-41, 4-6
determination of, 16-14
errors, 22-25
financial statement presentation, 20-20
front-loading of, 21-18
function-of-expense method, 4-10–11
in income statement, 19-13
income tax, 19-4, 19-6, 19-10, 19-13, 19-28
lease, 21-18, 21-72
nature-of-expense method, 4-10
operating, 23-20
other income and expense, 4-12, 4-18
pension, 20-20
prepaid, 3-19–23, 5-10, 22-25, 23-34
selling, 4-18

--- Page 2435 ---
share-appreciation rights, 16-33
unprofitable contracts, 18-43
worksheet entries, 23-34
Exploratory and evaluation (E&E) costs
depletion base, 11-17–18
development costs, 11-18
reporting, 11-20
types of, 11-17
Extended payment terms, 18-13
eXtensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL), 1-14, 24-33
Extinguishment of debt
bond, 14-19
with cash before maturity, 14-18–19
definition, 14-18
by exchanging assets or securities, 14-19–20
in-substance defeasance, 14-18
with modification of terms, 14-20–22
with non-current liabilities, 14-18–22, 14-28
F
Face interest rate, 6-8
Face value
bond, 14-5
notes issued at, 14-3
Factoring receivables, 7-20

--- Page 2436 ---
Factors, 7-20
FAF (Financial Accounting Foundation), 1-25
Failed sales, 7-21, 21-37
Failure to adjust for bad debts, 22-27
Failure to record accrued wages, 22-25
Failure to record depreciation, 22-26
Failure to record prepaid expenses, 22-25
Fair consequences, 1-13
Fair presentation, 5-29

--- Page 2437 ---
Fair value
vs book value, 10-16
controversy, 14-23, 17-31
convertible bond liability component, 16-5
debt investments, 17-4, 17-25–27, 17-78
as deemed cost, 24-46
definition, 2-17, 17-34
equity investments, 17-13, 17-17
of financial assets, 1-13
financial statement presentation, 17-17
hierarchy, 2-17, 17-49
impairment of, 17-25–27
imputed, 14-16
input reconciliation, 17-50
Level 1, 2-17, 17-34
Level 2, 2-17, 17-34
Level 3, 2-17, 17-34, 17-50, 17-51
measurement of, 14-22–23, 17-18, 17-49
of net assets, 12-11
principle of, 2-17
quantitative information about, 17-51
relative fair value basis, 10-13
reporting, 17-49
of restructured notes, 14-21
of small share dividends, 15-20

--- Page 2438 ---
Fair value adjustment
definition, 17-8
equity investment portfolio, 17-15, 17-16
HFCS investments, 17-9, 17-10
non-trading equity investments, 17-17
trading investments, 17-11
Fair value disclosures
definition, 24-7
for financial instruments, 17-48–51
with impairment, 17-51–52
Fair value hedge
accounting for, 17-38–40
accounting summary, 17-44
comprehensive example, 17-45–47
impact on financial statements, 17-48
income statement presentation, 17-40, 17-47
statement of financial position presentation, 17-40, 17-47
Fair value less costs to sell, 11-12
Fair value method
vs equity method, 17-20
share-based compensation, 16-13
share-option plans, 16-14

--- Page 2439 ---
Fair value option
debt investments, 17-12, 17-22
definition, 2-17
non-current liabilities, 14-28
Faithful representation, 2-9–10, 3-8–9
Family owners, 15-5
Family-controlled companies, 15-5
FASAC (Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Council), 1-25
FASB (Financial Accounting Standards Board), 1-7, 1-15, 1-24, 1-25
Finance costs, 4-12
Finance leases
classification of, 21-70
initial direct costs, 21-30
lessee accounting for, 21-41, 21-43–44, 21-70
lessor accounting for, 21-21–25, 21-41, 21-46
Financial accounting
definition, 1-4
ethics in, 1-14–15
Financial Accounting Foundation (FAF), 1-25
Financial Accounting Standards Advisory Council (FASAC), 1-25
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), 1-7, 1-15, 1-24, 1-25
Financial flexibility
definition, 5-17
liquidity and solvency and, 5-4
statement of cash flows and, 5-22–23

--- Page 2440 ---
Financial forecasts
definition, 24-31
reporting on, 24-31–33
Financial information
condensed comparative, 24-40
disaggregated, 24-16
types of, 24-3
Financial instruments
definition, 5-7
derivative. See Derivative instruments
traditional vs derivative, 17-37
Financial lease method, 21-7
Financial liquidity, 5-22
Financial markets, 1-24
Financial position. See Statement of financial position
Financial projections, 24-31
Financial ratios, 5-30–31

--- Page 2441 ---
Financial reporting, 1-4. See also Financial statements; specific
types of statements
auditor’s report, 24-21–25
challenges, 1-12–16
conceptual framework, 1-11
criteria for, 24-35
current issues, 24-31–36
discrete approach, 24-17
fraudulent, 24-33–35
general-purpose, 2-6
income for, 19-3
integral approach, 24-17
interim reports, 24-17–20
international, 1-1–1-4
Internet, 24-33
management’s reports, 24-26–30
objective of, 1-6–7, 2-5–6
off-and-on, 14-25
segmented information, 24-13, 24-15–16
significant issues, 1-14
standards, 1-5, 1-15
vs tax reporting, 19-3
Financial reporting income, 19-4

--- Page 2442 ---
Financial statement analysis
basic, 24-36–37, 24-49
perspective on, 24-37
steps, 24-37

--- Page 2443 ---
Financial statements. See also specific types of statements
additional information, 4-2, 5-24–29
changing elements, 4-2
comparative, 5-24
consistency, 5-29
consolidated, 17-13, 17-22
critical estimates, 9-2
definition, 1-4, 3-3
elements of, 2-5, 2-13, 2-41, 4-6
error corrections, 22-30–31
errors, 22-3
fair presentation, 5-29
fair value hedge, 17-48
fair value information, 17-49–51
FIFO, 22-10
fraud, 22-20–21
general-purpose, 1-6
guidelines for, 5-28–29
illustration, 3-30
management’s responsibilities, 24-30
for merchandising companies, 3-34–37
misstated ending inventory effects, 8-17
notes, 2-21, 5-24–27, 12-43, 24-5–7
and ownership structure, 3-6–7
pension plan reporting, 20-19–24

--- Page 2444 ---
preparation, 3-29–34, 9-2
preparation from worksheets, 3-44–45, 3-47
presentation, 3-23
restatements, 22-2
supplementary information, 2-21
Financial Times, 2-17
Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE), 15-5
Financing
during construction, 10-6
fixed-rate, 21-4
less costly, 21-4
off-balance-sheet, 14-23–24
project arrangement, 14-24
Financing activities
cash flow classification, 23-4
definition, 5-17, 23-4, 23-39
guidelines for, 23-4
net cash flow determination from, 23-9, 23-11–12, 23-15
statement of cash flows, 5-17
Financing costs
capitalization, 10-6
during construction, 10-6
interest costs, 8-11
summary, 4-18
Finished goods inventory, 8-3

--- Page 2445 ---
Finite (limited) useful life, 12-4
First-in, first-out (FIFO) method
comparative balances, 8-21
comparative results, 8-16, 8-20
comparative statements, 22-12
definition, 8-14
equity investments, 17-14
periodic inventory, 8-14, 8-15
perpetual inventory, 8-15

--- Page 2446 ---
First-time adoption of IFRS, 24-42–47
description of, 24-49
disclosure, 24-46
disclosure requirements, 24-49
elective exemptions, 24-45–46
exemptions from retrospective treatment, 24-45–46, 24-49
general guidelines, 24-42–43
illustration, 24-47
implementation steps, 24-43–47
presentation, 24-46
presentation requirements, 24-49
reconciling items for equity, 24-47
reconciling items for total comprehensive income, 24-47
relevant dates, 24-43
required exemptions, 24-45
summary, 24-47
timeline, 24-43
transition date, 24-43
Five-step revenue recognition process
example, 18-4–5
extended example, 18-5–9
illustration, 2-19
overview, 18-4–5
review, 18-9–19
summary, 18-19

--- Page 2447 ---
Fixed assets, 10-2. See also Property, plant, and equipment
Fixed-rate financing, 21-4
Fixed-rate leases, 21-4
Fixed-rate mortgages, 14-18
Flexibility
financial, 5-4, 5-17, 5-22–23
lease agreements, 21-4
Floating-rate mortgages, 14-18
f.o.b. destination, 8-8
f.o.b. shipping point, 8-8
Forecasts and projections
arguments for requiring, 24-31
global forecasts, 24-32
reporting on, 24-31–33
Forward contracts, 17-32, 17-40
Forward-looking information, 1-14
Fractional-year depreciation, 11-9, 11-10
Franchise agreements, 18-45, 18-46
Franchise fees, 18-46
Franchisees, 18-45

--- Page 2448 ---
Franchises
accounting, 18-45–47
definition, 12-8, 18-44
first year of operations, 18-47
inception and commencement of operations, 18-47
over time, 18-48
revenue over time, 18-48
revenue recognition, 18-44–45, 18-46
revenue recognition over time, 18-47–48
rights over time, 18-47–48
types of arrangements, 18-45
Franchisors, 18-45
Fraud
definition, 24-9
disclosure of, 24-9–10
restatements and, 22-20–21
types of, 24-34
Fraudulent financial reporting
causes of, 24-34–35
definition, 24-34
overview, 24-33–35

--- Page 2449 ---
Free cash flow
analysis illustration, 5-23
computation, 5-23
definition, 5-23
formula, 5-23
management’s report, 24-28
statement of cash flows and, 5-23–24
summary, 5-31
Free from error, 2-10
Freight costs, 9-19
Frequent-flyer programs, 13-21
Front-loading, 21-18
FTSE (Financial Times Stock Exchange), 15-5
Fulfillment costs, 18-32
Fulfillment value, 2-18
Full disclosure principle, 2-20–21, 24-3–7
Full-cost concept, 11-18
Function-of-expense method, 4-10–11
Fund (term), 20-3
Funded status
measurement, 20-7–8
pension worksheet, 20-13
presentation, 20-7
Future services: receipt of cash for, 3-13

--- Page 2450 ---
Future tax deductible amounts
background, 19-8–11
financial statement effects, 19-10–11
schedules, 19-10, 19-30, 19-33
Future tax rates
background, 19-16–17
deferred tax liability based on, 19-17
revision, 19-17
schedule, 19-17
Future taxable amounts
background, 19-5–8
financial statement effects, 19-7–8
schedules, 19-6, 19-17, 19-30, 19-33
Future value
of annuity, 6-14–20, 6-32
of annuity due, 6-17–18, 6-19, 6-32
in business context, 6-10
computation, 6-19–20
of deferred annuity, 6-25–26
definition, 6-8, 6-32
example problems, 6-18–20
formula, 6-9
investment problems, 6-10
of ordinary annuity, 6-14–16, 6-18, 6-19, 6-32
single-sum problems, 6-9–10, 6-13, 6-14

--- Page 2451 ---
Future value factor
formula, 6-7
ordinary annuity, 6-15
Future value of 1
definition, 6-6
table, 6-46–47
table excerpts, 6-7
Future value of an ordinary annuity of 1
definition, 6-6
table, 6-50–51
table excerpts, 6-15
Futures contracts
accounting for, 17-40–41
definition, 17-40
G
GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles). See U.S. GAAP
Gains
definition, 2-41
income from operations, 4-11–12
net income adjustments, 23-23–24
realized, 17-27, 23-23
on sale of bonds, 17-7
unrealized, 17-27, 23-23–24
unusual items reported recently, 4-11

--- Page 2452 ---
Gains trading, 17-10, 17-31
General checking accounts, 7-27
General journal, 3-9
General journal entries, 3-10
General ledger, 3-3, 3-9
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). See U.S. GAAP
Geographic areas: information about, 24-16

--- Page 2453 ---
Global Accounting Insights
accounting changes and error analysis, 22-53–54
accounting information systems, 3-70–72
cash and receivables, 7-56–57
conceptual frameworks, 2-39–41
definition, 1-15
dilutive securities, 16-59–60
disclosure requirements, 24-69–71
earnings per share, 16-59–60
equity, 15-48–50
income statements, 4-43–44
income taxes, 19-58–59
intangible assets, 12-42–43
inventories, 9-42–43
investments, 17-77–78
leases, 21-69–73
liabilities, 14-45–46
pensions, 20-45–46
property, plant, and equipment procedures, 11-55–56
standard-setting processes, 1-24–25
statement of cash flows, 5-56–57, 23-65–67
statement of financial position, 5-56–57
Global brands, valuable, 12-22–23
Global forecasts, 24-32
Global markets, 1-3–1-4, 15-1–2

--- Page 2454 ---
Global responsible investments, 12-2
Global tax rates, 19-17–18
Going concern assumption, 2-14, 24-23
Goods
consigned, 8-8
inventory, 8-7–9
notes issued for, 14-15–16
notes received for, 7-18
in transit, 8-8
Goods available for sale or use, 8-7
Goods sold, 4-18, 8-7
Goodwill
accounting issues, 12-10–13
definition, 12-10–11
determination of, 12-12
illustration, 12-16
impairment of, 12-15–16
internally created, 12-11
master valuation approach to, 12-12
purchased, 12-11–13
recording, 12-11–13
write-off, 12-13
Government bonds, 100-year, 14-7
Government debt, 14-2
Government grant approach, 13-24

--- Page 2455 ---
Government grants
accounting approaches for, 10-16–20
adjusted to assets, 10-18, 10-19
for borrowing costs, 10-18–20
as deferred revenue, 10-18, 10-19
definition, 10-16
illustrations, 10-19
for lab equipment, 10-17–18
for past losses, 10-18
Grant dates, 16-14
Greenhouse gases, 13-23–24
Gross leases, 21-28
Gross margin method, 9-12–15
Gross method
cash (sales) discounts, 7-9
entries under, 8-12
pension plans, 20-8
purchase discounts, 8-11
revenue recognition, 18-25

--- Page 2456 ---
Gross profit
determination of, 9-10
formulas, 9-14
inventory estimation, 9-12–15
percentage-of-completion vs cost-recovery, 18-41
relative standalone sales value, 9-10
reporting, 4-9
on selling price, 9-14
Gross profit method
application illustration, 9-13
assumptions, 9-12
evaluation of, 9-15
Gross profit percentage, 9-13–14
Gross reporting, 5-29
Growth companies, 15-18
Guaranteed residual value
example, 21-13
final payments, 21-14
journal entries, 21-14
lessee accounting, 21-8–9, 21-10
lessor accounting, 21-25
sales-type lease, 21-26
H
Half-year convention, 11-9

--- Page 2457 ---
Healthcare benefits, 20-23
Hedging
accounting summary, 17-44
cash flow hedge, 17-40–42, 17-44
comprehensive example, 17-45–48
definition, 9-12, 17-38
derivatives used for, 17-37–42, 17-44
designation, 17-43
documentation, 17-43
effectiveness, 17-43
fair value hedge, 17-38–40, 17-44, 17-45–47, 17-48
qualifying criteria, 17-43–44
risk management, 17-43
Held-for-collection (HFC) investments
accounting for, 17-5, 17-22
at amortized cost, 17-5–7
definition, 17-4
reporting, 5-6

--- Page 2458 ---
Held-for-collection and selling (HFCS) investments
accounting for, 17-5, 17-22
definition, 17-5
examples, 17-7–8, 17-9
fair value adjustment computation, 17-9, 17-10
financial statement presentation, 17-10
impairment of, 17-25–27
reclassification adjustment, 17-29
reporting of, 17-10
sale of, 17-9–10
single security, 17-7–8
Held-to-maturity securities, 17-78
High-quality standards, 1-5
Historical cost
decrease below, 11-27–28, 11-30–31
definition, 10-3
reporting, 5-4
Historical cost principle, 2-16
Holding gain or loss, 17-11
Holdings between 20% and 50%, 17-19–21
Holdings less than 20%, 17-14–18, 17-22
Holdings more than 50%, 17-21
Horizontal analysis, 24-41, 24-49
Host security, 17-42
Human resources fraud, 24-34

--- Page 2459 ---
Hybrid securities, 17-42
I
IAASB (International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board), 3-
72
IAS (International Accounting Standards), 1-9
guidelines for selection of accounting policy, 22-5
IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements, 24-2
IAS 7 Statement of Cash Flows, 24-2
IAS 8, 22-5

--- Page 2460 ---
IASB (International Accounting Standards Board), 1-24
agenda, 24-2
autonomy, 1-10
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, 1-11, 2-4, 22-2
definition, 1-8, 1-9
Discussion Forum, 24-2
due process, 1-9–1-10
function, 1-9
IFRS taxonomy, 24-33
independence, 1-10
international convergence, 1-15
interpretations, 1-11
membership, 1-10
Monitoring Board, 1-9
pronouncements, 1-10–1-11
Revenue from Contracts with Customers, 18-3, 18-4
voting, 1-10
IASC (International Accounting Standards Committee), 1-9
Identifiable assets test, 24-15
If-converted method, 16-25–26, 16-36

--- Page 2461 ---
IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards)
deferred taxation, 19-59
definition, 1-2, 1-8
economic consequences, 1-12–13
first-time adoption, 24-42
hierarchy of, 1-11–12
interpretations, 1-11
“Management Commentary—A Framework for Presentation”
statement, 2-21
political environment, 1-12–13
for SMEs, 1-2, 1-8
taxonomy, 24-33
terminology, 4-44
user groups that influence, 1-13
IFRS Advisory Council (the Advisory Council), 1-9
IFRS Foundation, 1-9
IFRS Interpretations Committee, 1-9, 1-11
Impairment loss
calculation based on value-in-use, 11-14
computation, 17-24
definition, 12-14
goodwill, 12-16
on license, 12-15
on patent, 12-14
recovery of, 11-28–29, 11-31–32, 17-25
reversal of, 11-14–15, 12-14–15

--- Page 2462 ---
Impairment test
definition, 11-12
illustration, 11-12
for indefinite-life intangibles, 12-5
Impairments
accounting for, 11-12–16
of assets to be disposed of, 11-15–16
definition, 17-23
examples, 11-13–14
fair value disclosures, 17-51–52
global insights, 11-55, 11-56
of goodwill, 12-15–16
of intangible assets, 12-13–16
measurement, 11-55, 11-56
questions that will need to be addressed, 11-2
recognition of, 11-12–13
reversal of, 24-36
of value, 17-22–27
Implicit interest rate, 21-9
Impracticability, 22-14, 22-32–33
Imprest bank accounts, 7-27
Imprest petty cash system, 7-27–28
Improvement expenditures, 10-20

--- Page 2463 ---
Improvements
accounting for, 10-23
land, 10-4
measurement of, 22-22
property, plant, and equipment, 10-21
Imputation
discount amortization with, 14-17
fair value, 14-16
interest rate, 7-19, 14-16, 14-17
Inadequacy, 11-4
Incentives, lease, 21-29

--- Page 2464 ---
Income
accumulated other comprehensive income, 5-11
allocation to non-controlling interest, 4-16–17
available to ordinary shareholders, 16-21, 16-24
for book purposes, 19-3
comprehensive, 4-22
from continuing operations, 4-14
deferred, 10-19
definition, 2-13, 4-6
different concepts of, 4-17
financial reporting, 19-3, 19-4
before income tax, 4-12
interim net income for seasonal business, 24-19
measurement of, 4-5–6
net, 4-13, 23-21
from operations, 4-9–12
other income and expense, 4-12, 4-18
pretax, 19-3, 19-13–16
reconciling, 23-21, 24-47
reporting various items, 4-9–18
summary, 4-18
for tax reporting, 19-4
taxable, 19-3, 19-13–16, 19-28
before taxes, 19-3
total comprehensive, 24-47

--- Page 2465 ---
Income approach, 10-12, 10-17
Income bonds, 14-3

--- Page 2466 ---
Income statements
accrual-basis, 3-38
cash-basis, 3-38
change in accounting principle, 4-19
comparative, 22-6, 22-12
comprehensive, 4-3, 4-21–23
condensed, 4-8
content, 4-5–9
current income statement, 23-7
deferred income taxes, 19-23–25
deferred tax assets, 19-11
definition, 3-3, 4-3
discontinued operations, 4-14
earnings per share, 16-20, 16-37
elements, 4-5–6
equity relationships and, 3-7
errors, 22-19, 22-23, 22-24–27, 22-29, 22-32
fair value hedge, 17-40, 17-47
format, 4-5–9
global insights, 4-43–44
HFCS securities, 17-10
illustrations, 3-30, 4-6–7, 4-8, 4-15, 5-19, 17-28, 22-9, 22-10, 23-7,
23-11, 23-13, 23-18, 23-26
income tax expenses, 19-7, 19-13, 19-31, 19-34
income taxes, 19-12–13
intermediate components, 4-6–7

--- Page 2467 ---
lease information, 21-30
lessee accounting, 21-12
lessor accounting, 21-24
limitations, 4-3
for merchandising companies, 3-35
metrics created from, 4-17
misstated ending inventory effects, 8-17
misstated purchases and inventory effects, 8-18
preparing, 3-30
related equity statements, 4-21–24
reporting sales returns and allowances, 18-21, 18-22
retained earnings statements, 4-21
sample supporting schedule, 4-8
segmented, 24-12
taxes on, 19-24
usefulness, 4-3
uses and limitations, 4-3–5
worksheet columns, 3-47
worksheet to correct errors, 22-29

--- Page 2468 ---
Income tax expenses
components, 19-8, 19-23–24
computation, 19-6, 19-7, 19-10
definition, 19-28
formula, 19-13
income statement presentation, 19-7, 19-13, 19-31, 19-34
vs income taxes payable, 19-4
total, 19-31, 19-34
Income tax rates, 19-18
Income tax refund receivable, 19-36
Income tax withholding, 13-12

--- Page 2469 ---
Income taxes
accounting fundamentals, 19-3–12
accounting issues, 19-12–17
cash payments for, 23-20
changes in, 23-23
components, 19-24
deferred, 19-22–28, 23-23
definition, 19-28
disclosures, 19-26
financial statement presentation, 19-22–27
global insights, 19-58–59
income before, 4-12
income statement presentation, 19-12–13
interim reports, 24-18
journal entry to record, 19-30–31, 19-33–34
reporting, 19-23
safe (tax) havens, 19-1–2
summary, 4-18
Income taxes currently payable, 19-28
Income taxes payable
computation, 19-15, 19-29, 19-33
current liabilities, 13-11–12
vs income tax expenses, 19-4
with realized loss on carryforward, 19-19
reconciliation, 19-15

--- Page 2470 ---
Incorporation articles, 15-3
Incremental borrowing rate, 21-9
Incremental method, 15-8
Incremental shares, 16-27
Indefinite useful life, 12-4
Indefinite-life intangible assets
definition, 12-4, 12-5
impairment of, 12-15
Independent lessors, 21-5
Indirect effects of change in accounting policy, 22-13–14, 22-33
Indirect method
net approach to allowance for doubtful accounts, 23-26
net cash flow from operating activities determination, 23-8, 23-11
presentation of allowance for doubtful accounts, 23-25
support for, 23-22
Induced conversions, 16-7–8
Inflation rate of interest, expected, 6-29
Information systems, 3-1–72
basic overview, 3-2–9
basic terminology, 3-3
definition, 3-2–3
global insights, 3-70–72
Information technology, 1-24
blockchain, 3-2
Initial franchise fees, 18-46

--- Page 2471 ---
Initial operating losses, 12-22
Initial public offerings (IPOs), 15-2
In-process R&D, 12-20
Input measures, 18-36
Installation, 18-16–17
In-substance defeasance, 14-18
Insurance
adjustment for, 3-20–21
self-insurance, 13-26
Insurance payments, 3-14

--- Page 2472 ---
Intangible assets
accounting policies, 5-25
accounting treatment for, 12-5
amortization of, 12-4–5, 12-7
artistic-related, 12-7–8
characteristics of, 12-2–3
contract-related, 12-8
customer-related, 12-6–7
definition, 5-7
disclosures, 12-17
global insights, 12-42–43
goodwill, 12-10–13, 12-15–16
impairment of, 12-13–16
indefinite-life, 12-4, 12-5, 12-15
internally created, 12-3–4, 12-21
issues, 12-2–5
limited-life, 12-4–5, 12-14
marketing-related, 12-6
notes to financial statements, 12-43
presentation, 12-17
purchased, 12-20
R&D costs, 12-20
recognition of, 12-21
statement of financial position presentation, 5-7
technology-related, 12-8–10

--- Page 2473 ---
types of, 12-6–10
valuation of, 12-3–4
Integral approach, 24-17, 24-19, 24-20
Interest
accruing, 14-9–10
adjustment for, 3-26
components of, 6-29
compound, 6-5–8, 6-32
computation, 6-4
controlling, 17-21
credit risk rate of, 6-29
after debt modification, 14-21
definition, 6-4
equity, 14-20
expected inflation rate of, 6-29
on the liability, 20-10
nature of, 6-4
net, 20-9–10
non-controlling, 4-16–17, 4-18, 5-11
note disclosure of, 23-29
for one month, 3-26
reporting, 23-29
residual, 15-5
simple, 6-5, 6-32
variables, 6-4

--- Page 2474 ---
Interest costs, 8-11
Interest expenses
computation, 14-10
lessee accounting, 21-11
Interest margins, profitable, 21-5
Interest rate risk, 17-38
Interest rate swaps
definition, 17-45
financial statement presentation, 17-47–48
illustration, 17-46

--- Page 2475 ---
Interest rates
appropriate, 6-29–30
and bond values, 14-4
choice of, 7-19, 14-16–17
computation, 6-13–14, 6-24
coupon, 14-5
definition, 6-4, 6-8, 6-32
effective-interest rate on loan, 6-24
for expected cash flows, 6-29–30
face, 6-8
implicit, 21-9
imputed, 7-19, 14-16, 14-17
incremental borrowing rate, 21-9
negative, 14-14–15
nominal, 6-8, 14-5
pure, 6-29
stated, 6-8, 14-5
time diagram for, 6-13
Interest tables, 6-6, 6-7
Interest-bearing notes
issued, 13-5
long-term notes payable, 14-14
recognition of, 7-17–18
time diagrams, 7-17, 14-16
Interim net income, 24-19

--- Page 2476 ---
Interim reports
accounting policies, 24-17–20
definition, 24-17
disclosures, 24-17–18
discrete approach, 24-17, 24-19, 24-20
for income taxes, 24-18
integral approach, 24-17, 24-19, 24-20
reporting requirements, 24-17–18
seasonality, 24-18–20
unique problems, 24-18–20
International Accounting Standards. See IAS
International Accounting Standards Board. See IASB
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), 1-9
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB), 3-
72
International convergence, 1-15
International exchange statistics, 1-4
International financial reporting, 1-1–1-4
International Financing Reporting Standards. See IFRS
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), 1-8
International standards, 1-9
Internet financial reporting, 24-33

--- Page 2477 ---
Intraperiod tax allocation
accounting, 4-15–16
comprehensive example, 19-28–34
definition, 19-23
discontinued operations (gain), 4-16
discontinued operations (loss), 4-16
illustrations, 4-16
note disclosure, 4-16
Intrinsic value, 17-35

--- Page 2478 ---
Inventories
accounting for, 8-1–2
accounting policies, 5-25
agricultural, 9-8, 9-9
with allowance account, 9-6
alternative valuation methods, 8-16, 8-21
analysis of, 9-22–23
average days to sell, 9-23
average-cost method, 8-13–14, 8-16
classification of, 8-3–4
comparative, 8-20, 8-21
cost flow, 8-4–6, 8-12–16
cost-basis approach to, 8-1–42
costs included in, 8-10–12
critical estimates, 9-2
definition, 8-3
disclosures, 9-21, 9-43, 24-7
ending misstated, 8-17–18
errors, 8-17–19, 22-18
estimation of, 9-12–15
FIFO method, 8-14–16
final value, 9-4
finished goods, 8-3
global insights, 9-42–43
goods included in, 8-7–9

--- Page 2479 ---
gross profit estimation method, 9-12–15
increase in, 23-14
issues, 8-3–7
judgments, 9-2
LIFO method, 8-16, 8-19, 8-20
manufacturing concerns, 8-3
merchandising concerns, 8-3
periodic, 8-5, 8-14, 8-15, 8-19, 8-21
perpetual, 8-4–6, 8-15, 8-20, 8-21, 9-5
presentation, 9-6, 9-20–23, 9-43
raw materials, 8-3
reduction to NRV, 9-5, 9-6, 9-7
retail, 9-15–20
retrospective accounting changes, 22-9–12
shortages, 9-20
specific identification, 8-13
statement of financial position presentation, 5-8–9, 17-39
supplies, 8-4
types of restatements, 22-18
uncertainties, 9-2
valuation, 8-1–42, 9-1–44
valuation bases, 9-7–12
work in process, 8-3
worksheet entries, 23-34
Inventory control, 8-6

--- Page 2480 ---
Inventory cost flow, 8-4–6
Inventory loss: recovery of, 9-6–7
Inventory turnover
definition, 9-23
formula, 9-23, 24-38
summary, 5-31
Investees
definition, 17-13
losses exceed carrying amount, 17-21
Investing activities
cash flow classification, 23-4
definition, 5-17, 23-39
net cash flow from, 23-9, 23-11–12, 23-15

--- Page 2481 ---
Investments
accounting approaches, 17-22, 17-78
adjustment to carrying value, 17-17
cash flows, 17-24
debt, 17-3–17-12, 17-22
equity, 17-13–22, 23-34
future value problems, 6-10
global insights, 17-77–78
held-for-collection (HFC), 5-6, 17-4, 17-5–7
held-for-collection and selling (HFCS), 17-5, 17-7–10
impairment of value, 17-22–27
long-term, 5-6
non-trading equity, 5-6
by owners, 2-41
recycling adjustments, 17-27–30
reporting, 17-21, 17-22
by shareholders, 3-12
short-term, 5-10, 7-3
single-sum, 6-10
temporary, 7-3
trading, 5-6, 17-5, 17-11
transfers between categories, 17-30–31
worksheet entries, 23-34
Investors, 1-6, 17-13
Involuntary conversion, 10-24

--- Page 2482 ---
IOSCO (International Organization of Securities Commissions), 1-8
I.O.U.s. See Postdated checks and I.O.U.s
IPOs (initial public offerings), 15-2
J
Journalizing
basic transactions, 3-9–10
definition, 3-3
technique, 3-9
Journals
definition, 3-3
posting entries, 3-10–11
special journals, 3-10
Judgments, 5-4, 9-2
significant, 18-33
Junk bonds, 14-3
K
Key audit matters (KAMs)
definition, 24-24
illustration, 24-24–25
requirements, 18-2
L
Lab equipment, 10-17–18

--- Page 2483 ---
Land. See also Property, plant, and equipment (PP&E)
cost of, 10-4
increase in, 23-11
net cash flow from, 23-15
revaluation of, 11-21, 11-27–29
worksheet entries, 23-34–35
Land improvements, 10-4
Last-in, first-out (LIFO) method
comparative balances, 8-21
comparative results, 8-20
cost flow assumption, 8-19
death of, 24-36
definition, 8-19
IFRS and, 8-16
periodic inventory, 8-19
perpetual inventory, 8-20
Law, corporate, 15-3
Lawsuits
measurement, 13-17
as provisions, 13-16
LBOs (leveraged buyouts), 14-3, 15-12
Lease amounts, 21-25
Lease assets
disclosure, 21-33
measurement of, 21-7–9

--- Page 2484 ---
Lease classification tests, 21-20
examples, 21-40, 21-42, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sale-leasebacks, 21-38
for sales-type leases, 21-22
Lease disclosures, 21-31–33
lessee, 21-31–32
lessor, 21-32–33
qualitative, 21-31
quantitative, 21-31, 21-32
Lease expenses, 21-72
Lease liability
amortization schedule, 21-40
computation, 21-13
measurement of, 21-7–9

--- Page 2485 ---
Lease payments
calculation, 21-19, 21-22, 21-25
calculation examples, 21-39
computation, 21-27, 21-42, 21-71
discount rate, 21-9
fixed, 21-8
lessee accounting, 21-8–9
present value, 21-10
present value test, 21-20
related to purchase or termination options, 21-9
residual value, 21-8–9
variable, 21-8
Lease Receivable, 21-21, 21-23
Lease term
bargain renewal periods, 21-20
definition, 21-4
lessee accounting, 21-7–8
scenario 1, 21-39–41
scenario 2, 21-42–45
Lease term test, 21-19, 21-20
examples, 21-40, 21-42, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sales-type leases, 21-22

--- Page 2486 ---
Leases
accounting for (lessees), 21-6–18
accounting for (lessors), 21-18–27
adjustments, 21-28–30, 21-46
alternative use test, 21-19, 21-21
amortization examples, 21-11, 21-13, 21-16, 21-23, 21-43, 21-72
bargain renewal options, 21-7–8
bargain renewal periods, 21-20
capitalization of, 21-6, 21-7, 21-13
classification, 21-70
classification by lessor, 21-19–21
classification tests, 21-19
definition, 6-4, 21-6
disclosures, 24-7
executory costs, 21-28
expenses related to, 21-18
finance (sales-type), 21-21–22
financial lease method, 21-7
global insights, 21-69–73
gross vs net, 21-28
incentives, 21-29
initial direct costs, 21-29–30
internal costs, 21-30
low-value, 21-17, 21-45
operating, 21-20, 21-26–27

--- Page 2487 ---
prepayments, 21-29
present value test, 21-19, 21-20
purchase option test, 21-19, 21-20
right-of-use asset adjustments, 21-29
sales-type, 21-21–22
short-term, 21-17, 21-45
special problems, 21-28–35
termination options, 21-9
transfer of ownership test, 21-19, 21-20
Leasing
advantages of, 21-35
advantages of (lessees), 21-4
advantages of (lessors), 21-5
captive companies, 21-5
economics of, 21-18–19
environment related to, 21-3–6
impacts, 21-33
popularity, 21-1–2
sale-leasebacks, 21-35, 21-37–39
tax benefits, 21-35
types of assets leased, 21-3
Ledgers, 3-3
Legal obligations, 13-16
Legally restricted deposits, 7-4

--- Page 2488 ---
Lessee accounting, 21-6–18
disclosure of leases, 21-31–32
effective-interest method, 21-9–12
examples, 21-10–12, 21-13–17, 21-39–45, 21-73
for finance (sales-type) leases, 21-41, 21-43–44, 21-70
financial statement presentation, 21-30
income statement presentation, 21-12
journal entries, 21-16
for operating leases, 21-70, 21-71, 21-73
sale-leaseback, 21-38
statement of financial position presentation, 21-12
summary, 21-17–18
Lessees
advantages of leasing for, 21-4
definition, 21-3

--- Page 2489 ---
Lessor accounting, 21-18–27
classification of leases, 21-19–21
examples, 21-22–25, 21-39–45
for finance (sales-type) leases, 21-21–25, 21-41, 21-46
income statement presentation, 21-24
internal costs, 21-30
lease disclosures, 21-32–33
measurement, 21-21–26
for operating leases, 21-26–27, 21-44–45
presentation, 21-21–26, 21-30
for residual values, 21-25–26
sale-leaseback entries, 21-38
statement of financial position presentation, 21-24
Lessors
banks, 21-4–5
captive leasing companies, 21-5
categories of, 21-4
classification tests, 21-19
definition, 21-4–5
independents, 21-5
Leveraged buyouts (LBOs), 14-3, 15-12

--- Page 2490 ---
Liabilities
accounting policies, 5-26
accrued, 3-40
alternative approaches, 20-6–7
contingent, 13-27–28
contract, 18-30, 18-31
convertible bond component, 16-5
current, 5-13–14, 13-3–15, 13-29–31
current issues, 24-33
deferred tax, 19-4, 19-7, 19-28
definition, 2-13, 2-41, 5-5, 13-3
employee-related, 13-12–15, 13-32
environmental, 6-4, 13-22
estimated, 13-15
expected to be refinanced, 13-7
fair value controversy, 17-31
forecasts and, 24-33
gains and losses, 20-16
global insights, 14-45–46
historical cost reporting, 5-4
impaired, 17-51–52
interest on, 20-10
lease, 21-7–9
maturity analysis, 5-27
measurement of, 20-6–8

--- Page 2491 ---
net liability approach, 13-23–24
non-current, 5-12–13, 14-1–47
payroll, 13-12
pension, 20-6–8, 20-16
presentation and analysis of, 13-29–31
real, 19-8
reporting, 13-2–3
segment, 24-16
share-based awards, 16-32–33
statement of financial position, 5-5
Liability approach, 19-27
LIBOR (London Interbank Offering rate), 14-18
Licenses
definition, 12-8
impairment loss on, 12-15
LIFO. See Last-in, first-out
Limited-life intangibles
amortization, 12-4–5, 23-22
definition, 12-4
impairment, 12-14
Liquidating dividends, 11-19–20, 15-17, 15-19–20
Liquidity
definition, 5-4, 5-17
financial, 5-22
lack of, 15-16

--- Page 2492 ---
Liquidity ratios
definition, 5-30, 24-38
formulas and use, 5-30–31, 24-38
Litigation
disclosure of, 13-18
pending or threatened, 13-17
Litigation provisions, 13-17–18
Loans and receivables. See Receivables
Lockbox accounts, 7-27
London Interbank Offering rate (LIBOR), 14-18
Long-term bonds, 6-27–28, 14-2
Long-term borrowing, 7-4
Long-term contracts
cost-recovery (zero-profit) method, 18-40–41
losses on, 18-42–44
percentage-of-completion method, 18-35–40
retrospective change in accounting, 22-6–7
revenue recognition, 18-35–41
Long-term debt
analysis of, 14-28
covenants or restrictions, 14-3
current maturities, 13-6
disclosure of, 14-26
Long-term debt ratios, 14-27

--- Page 2493 ---
Long-term investments
statement of financial position presentation, 5-7
types, 5-6
Long-term notes payable
accounting for, 14-12–18, 14-28
definition, 14-12
Loss carrybacks
accounting for, 19-34–36
with carryforward, 19-36
definition, 19-35
example, 19-35–36
procedure, 19-35
recognition, 19-36
Loss carryforwards
accounting for, 19-18–19
benefit in loss year, 19-19
benefit when realized, 19-21
example, 19-19–21
net operating loss, 19-18
non-recognition of, 19-20–21
operating loss, 19-27
procedure, 19-18
realized, 19-19, 19-21
recognition of, 19-19–20
Loss method, 9-5, 9-6

--- Page 2494 ---
Losses
current period, 18-42–43
definition, 2-41
on disposal of used machines, 10-15
exchanges, 10-14–15
government grants for past losses, 10-18
impairment, 17-24, 17-25
income from operations, 4-11–12
initial operating, 12-22
inventory, 9-6–7
investee, 17-21
long-term contract, 18-42–44
net income, 4-11–12
net operating, 19-18–21
realized, 23-23
recovery of, 17-25
on redemption of bonds, 14-19
reporting, 4-11–12
residual value, 21-14–15
on sale of bonds, 17-7
on sale of equipment, 23-14
on unprofitable contracts, 18-43–44
unrealized, 23-23–24
unusual items reported recently, 4-11
Lottery payments, 6-23

--- Page 2495 ---
Lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV)
alternative applications, 9-4
definition, 9-3
disclosures, 9-3
illustrations, 9-4, 9-16, 9-18, 9-19
methods of applying, 9-4–5
rule evaluation, 9-7
Low-value leases, 21-17, 21-45
Lump-sum prices, 10-12
Lump-sum purchase, 9-10, 10-12–13
Lump-sum securities issuance, 15-7–8
M
Management approach, 24-14
Management commentary, 24-26
“Management Commentary—A Framework for Presentation”
statement (IFRS), 2-21
Management gross margin, 24-28
Management performance measures, 24-28–29
Management stewardship, 1-6, 2-6
Management’s discussion and analysis, 24-27
Management’s reports, 24-26–30
Management’s responsibilities
for financial statements, 24-30
reporting on, 24-30
Managerial accounting, 1-4

--- Page 2496 ---
Manufacturing companies
comparison with merchandising companies, 8-3
current assets, 8-3
flow of costs, 8-4
inventories, 8-3, 8-4
Marginal principle approach, 24-18
Markdowns
cancellations, 9-16
in cost-to-retail ratio, 9-18
definition, 9-16
retail inventory method with, 9-16–19
Market approach, 10-12
Market condition, 16-15
Market rate, 14-6
Marketing-related intangible assets, 12-6
Markup cancellations, 9-16
Markup on cost, percentage, 9-14
Markups
definition, 9-16
retail inventory method with, 9-16–19
Master valuation approach, 12-12
Matching principle, 2-20
Materiality, 2-8, 7-10

--- Page 2497 ---
Maturity analysis
for financial liabilities, 5-27
for receivables, 5-26
Maturity value, 14-5
Measurement
capital maintenance approach, 4-5
present value–based accounting measurements, 6-4
principles of, 2-16–18, 6-2
transaction approach, 4-5
Merchandising companies
closing entries, 3-37
comparison with manufacturing companies, 8-3
current assets, 8-3
financial statements, 3-34–37
flow of costs, 8-4
income statement, 3-35
inventories, 8-3
retained earnings statement, 3-35
statement of financial position for, 3-36
Mergers and acquisitions, 1-24
Mineral resources
definition, 11-17
depletion of, 23-22
presentation, 11-19, 11-23–24
statement of financial position presentation, 11-19

--- Page 2498 ---
Misclassification, 22-18
Misstated purchases and inventory, 8-17, 8-18
Modified cash basis, 3-39
Modified perpetual inventory system, 8-6
Monetary unit assumption, 2-14–15
Monthly rent payments, 3-14
Mortgage notes payable, 14-17–18
Mortgage-backed securities, 17-38
Mortgages, 14-18
Moving-average method, 8-14
Multinational companies, 1-24
N
Natural resources, 11-16–17
Nature-of-expense method, 4-10
Negative interest rates, 14-14–15
Net assets
fair value of, 12-11
illustrations, 12-16
Net cash flow from investing and financing activities, 23-9, 23-11–
12, 23-15

--- Page 2499 ---
Net cash flow from operating activities
cash inflow, 23-27
cash outflow, 23-27
computation, 23-9, 23-12, 23-17, 23-27
determination, 23-8–9, 23-13, 23-14, 23-16–21
direct method, 23-16–21
direct vs indirect method, 23-21–22
indirect method, 23-8, 23-11, 23-14, 23-16
vs net income, 23-8–9
Net cash provided by operating activities
computation, 5-20
illustration, 5-22
major classes, 23-18
negative, 5-22
reconciliation of net income to, 23-21
Net debt, 24-28
Net deferred tax expense, 19-31
Net defined benefit obligation (asset), 20-7–8
Net funded status, 20-21

--- Page 2500 ---
Net income
adjusted, 16-26
adjustments to, 23-22–25
effect of adjusting inventory to NRV on, 9-7
equation, 20-10
interim, 24-19
vs net cash flow from operating activities, 23-8–9
reconciliation to net cash provided by operating activities, 23-21
reporting, 4-13
volatility, 20-24
Net interest, 20-8, 20-9–10
Net leases, 21-28
Net liability approach, 13-23–24
Net losses, 23-27
Net method
cash (sales) discounts, 7-9, 8-11
entries under, 8-12
pension plans, 20-7
revenue recognition, 18-25
Net operating loss
accounting for, 19-18–21
carrybacks, 19-34–36
carryforwards, 19-18
definition, 19-18

--- Page 2501 ---
Net realizable value, 9-7–10, 9-23
agricultural accounting, 9-8–9
agricultural inventory, 9-8
computation, 9-3
definition, 9-3
recording, 9-5–6
reduction of inventory to, 9-5, 9-6, 9-7
Net reporting, 5-29
Net settlement, 17-37
Net working capital, 5-14
Neutrality, 2-9–10, 22-22
New machines, 10-14
Nominal accounts, 3-3
Nominal rate, 6-8, 14-5
Non-accumulating rights, 13-13
Non-adjusted subsequent events, 24-11
Non-cash notes, 14-15
Non-cash transactions
charges or credits, 23-36
considerations for, 17-14
shares issued in, 15-8–9
significant, 5-21
Non-consolidated subsidiaries, 14-23–24
Non-contributory pension plans, 20-3

--- Page 2502 ---
Non-controlling interest
allocation to, 4-16–17
definition, 4-16, 5-11
presentation, 4-17
summary, 4-18
Non-counterbalancing errors, 22-32
analysis, 22-26–27
bad debts, 22-27
definition, 22-24
depreciation, 22-26
Non-current assets, 5-6–8, 6-4
Non-current liabilities
analysis of, 14-26–27, 14-28
bonds payable, 14-3–11
definition, 5-12, 14-3
extinguishment, 14-18–22, 14-28
fair value option, 14-22–23
long-term notes payable, 14-12–18
presentation, 14-25, 14-28
statement of financial position presentation, 5-13
types, 5-12–13
Non-current receivables, 7-6
Non-financial measurements, 1-14
Non-monetary assets, 10-13–16
Non-refundable upfront fees, 18-28, 18-29

--- Page 2503 ---
Non-trade receivables
definition, 7-6
reporting, 7-7
Non-trading equity, 5-6
Non-trading equity investments
accounting for, 17-16–18, 17-22
definition, 17-14
fair value adjustment, 17-17
Non-trading equity securities, 17-77
No-par shares, 15-6–7
Note disclosures, 23-29, 24-8
Note discount amortization, 14-13, 14-14
Notes
interest-bearing, 14-14, 14-16
issued at face value, 14-12
issued for property, goods, or services, 14-15–16
not issued at face value, 14-12–14
restructured, 14-21
zero-interest-bearing, 14-12–13

--- Page 2504 ---
Notes payable
definition, 13-4
discount on, 14-16
interest-bearing, 13-5
long-term, 14-12–18, 14-28
mortgage, 14-17–18
non-cash transaction entries, 14-15
short-term, 14-12
short-term non-trade, 23-27
special situations, 14-15–17
zero-interest-bearing notes issued, 13-5–6
Notes receivable
definition, 7-6, 7-15
interest-bearing notes, 7-17–18
issued at face value, 7-15–16
not issued at face value, 7-16–18
present value, 7-16
promissory notes, 7-15
for property, goods, or services, 7-18
recognition of, 7-15–19
valuation, 7-19
zero-interest-bearing notes, 7-15, 7-16–17

--- Page 2505 ---
Notes to financial statements
accounting policies, 5-24–27, 24-5–7
additional, 5-26–27
common notes, 24-7
definition, 6-4
for depreciation adjustments, 3-22
full disclosure principle, 2-21, 24-5–7
for intangible assets, 12-43
for intraperiod tax allocations, 4-16
pension plan reporting, 20-22–23
for percentage-of-completion method, 18-40
for significant non-cash transactions, 23-28
Notional amount, 17-35, 17-37
Not-sufficient-funds (NSF) checks, 7-29
Number of periodic rents, 6-19
Number of time periods, 6-13
O
Obsolescence, 11-4
protection against, 21-4
Off-and-on reporting, 14-25
Off-balance-sheet financing, 14-23–24
examples, 14-28
forms of, 14-23–24
rationale for, 14-24

--- Page 2506 ---
Office equipment. See also Property, plant, and equipment
purchase of, 3-13
Offsetting, 5-28
One statement approach, 4-22
Onerous contracts
definition, 9-11, 13-24
disclosure of, 13-24
provisions for, 13-24
Opening IFRS statement of financial position, 24-43, 24-49
illustration, 24-44
policy changes, 24-44
preparation, 24-43–44
preparation steps, 24-43
Operating activities
cash flow classification, 23-3–4
definition, 5-16, 23-39
net cash flow from, 23-8–9, 23-11, 23-12, 23-14, 23-16–21, 23-27
net cash provided by, 5-20, 5-22, 23-21
statement of cash flows, 23-21
Operating cash receipts, 23-17
Operating cycle, 13-4
Operating expenses
cash payments for, 23-20
computation, 3-40–41
conversion of cash paid to, 3-41

--- Page 2507 ---
Operating leases
classification, 21-20, 21-70
examples, 21-71–73
initial direct costs, 21-30
lease classification tests for, 21-27
lessee accounting for, 21-70, 21-71, 21-73
lessor accounting for, 21-26–27, 21-44–45
Operating loss carryforwards, 19-27
Operating losses
initial, 12-22
net, 19-18–21
Operating profit (loss) test, 24-15
Operating segments
definition, 24-14
identifying, 24-14–15
illustration, 24-15
reportable, 24-14
reporting requirements, 24-15–16
Operations
continuing, 4-14
discontinued, 4-14, 4-18
discontinued (gain), 4-16
discontinued (loss), 4-16
income from, 4-9–12
Option contracts, 17-32

--- Page 2508 ---
Option premium, 17-35
Ordinary annuities
for college fund, 6-24
definition, 6-14, 6-32
future value of, 6-14–16, 6-18, 6-19, 6-32
present value of, 6-20–22, 6-23–24, 6-32
Ordinary shares
classes, 15-4
contingently issuable, 16-28
definition, 15-4
income available to holders, 16-21, 16-24
issuance par value, 15-6
return on, 15-25
weighted-average, 16-21–24, 16-26
Organizational costs, 12-21
Originating differences, 19-14
Originating temporary differences, 19-13–14
Other assets, 5-8
Other comprehensive income
accumulated, 4-24, 5-11, 20-21
computation, 20-20, 20-21
definition, 4-22
non-trading equity investments, 17-16–18
presentation, 4-24
reporting, 20-21

--- Page 2509 ---
Other costs, 8-10
Other income and expense, 4-12, 4-18
Output measures, 18-36
Outstanding checks, 7-29
Outstanding shares, 15-13
Overhead, 10-5
Overstatement, 22-26
Ownership interests, 15-4
Ownership structure, 3-6–7
P
Paid-in (contributed) capital, 15-5
Par value
bonds issued at, 14-5, 14-10
bonds selling at, 14-5
definition, 14-5
Par value method
purchase of treasury shares, 15-12
share dividends, 15-20
Par value shares
ordinary shares, 15-6
preference shares, 15-10
Parent company, 17-21
Parenthetical explanations, 5-27–28
Parking transactions, 8-9

--- Page 2510 ---
Partial-period depreciation, 11-9, 11-33
Partial-period interest amortization, 14-11
Participating preference shares, 15-10
Past obligatory events, 13-15
Past service costs (PSC)
accounting for, 20-13–15
definition, 20-13
types of, 20-14
Patents
accounting for, 12-8–10
battles, 12-9
box rates, 12-18–19
definition, 12-8
impairment loss on, 12-14
issuance of shares for, 15-9
post-impairment carrying value, 12-15
as strategic lifeblood, 12-10
Payables
consideration, 13-20, 13-21
income tax, 19-4, 19-28
Payout ratio
computation, 15-25
definition, 15-25
formula and use, 5-31, 24-38
Payroll deductions, 13-12–13

--- Page 2511 ---
Payroll liabilities, 13-12
Pension expenses
components, 20-10
in financial statements, 20-20
illustration, 20-4
volatility, 20-24
Pension obligations, 20-6
Pension plan asset/liability
actual return on, 20-10–11
classification, 20-22
definition, 20-12
determination, 20-10
gains and losses, 20-16, 20-20–21

--- Page 2512 ---
Pension plans
accounting fundamentals, 20-3–11
accumulated benefit obligations, 20-6, 20-7
aggregation, 20-22
asset ceiling, 20-21
contributory, 20-3
cost components, 20-8
defined benefit obligations, 20-6, 20-7
defined benefit plans, 20-4–5, 20-26
defined contribution plans, 20-4, 20-25–26
definition, 20-3
disclosure, 20-23
disclosure requirements, 20-22
expenses, 20-20
financial health over the last few years, 20-19
flow of cash among participants, 20-3
funded, 20-3, 20-4
funded status, 20-7–8, 20-13
global insights, 20-45–46
measures of liability, 20-6–8
measures of obligations, 20-7, 20-26
net funded status, 20-21
non-contributory, 20-3
qualified, 20-3
reconciliation, 20-15

--- Page 2513 ---
reconciliation schedule, 20-13, 20-15, 20-18
reporting changes in obligations, 20-8–10
reporting in financial statements, 20-19–24
reporting in notes to financial statements, 20-22–23
types, 20-3, 20-25–26
vested benefit obligations, 20-6, 20-7
vulnerability, 20-2
Pension worksheets
2022 entries, 20-12–13
2023 entries, 20-14–15
2024 entries, 20-16–19
2025 entries, 20-18
basic format, 20-11
funded status, 20-13
illustrations, 20-12, 20-17
using, 20-11–13
Pensions
definition, 6-4
disclosures, 24-7
global insights, 20-45–46
vs postretirement healthcare benefits, 20-23

--- Page 2514 ---
Percentage analysis, 24-41–42, 24-49
definition, 24-41
horizontal, 24-41
illustrations, 24-41
vertical, 24-41
Percentage markup on cost, 9-14
Percentage-of-completion method
accounting change, 22-7
vs cost-recovery method, 22-6
cost-to-cost basis, 18-35, 18-36–38
definition, 18-35
financial statement presentation, 18-38–40
for long-term contracts, 18-35–40, 22-6
for losses on unprofitable contracts, 18-43
note disclosure, 18-40
Percentage-of-receivables approach, 7-13
Performance obligations
contract modifications, 18-31
definition, 18-10
multiple, 18-16
product, installation, and service, 18-16–17
remaining, 18-33
satisfied, 18-8–9, 18-17–18
separate, 18-6–7, 18-8, 18-10–11, 18-15–17, 18-31
transaction price allocation to, 18-8, 18-15–17

--- Page 2515 ---
Period costs, 8-11, 8-22
definition, 2-20, 8-11
expense recognition procedures, 2-20
Period rents, 6-19
Periodic inventory, 8-21
comparison with perpetual system, 8-5–6
definition, 8-5
FIFO method, 8-14, 8-15
LIFO method, 8-19
weighted-average method, 8-14
Periodic rent, 6-24–25
Periodicity assumptions, 2-15
Periods, 6-13
Permanent differences, 19-14–16
Permits, 12-8
Perpetual inventory, 8-21
accounting features, 8-4–5
comparison with periodic system, 8-5–6
FIFO method, 8-15
LIFO method, 8-20
modified, 8-6
moving-average method, 8-14
reduction to NRV, 9-5
Personnel R&D costs, 12-20

--- Page 2516 ---
Petty cash
classification of, 7-5
imprest system, 7-27–28
reporting, 7-3
Plant. See Property, plant, and equipment
Plant assets, 10-2. See also Property, plant, and equipment
Points, 14-17
Political costs, 22-22
Political environment, 1-12–13
Postage on hand
classification, 7-5
reporting, 7-3
Post-balance-sheet events, 24-70–71
Post-closing trial balance
definition, 3-3
illustration, 3-33
Postdated checks and I.O.U.s
classification, 7-5
reporting, 7-3
Postemployment benefits, 13-13
Posting
basic transactions, 3-10–11
closing entries, 3-32–33
definition, 3-3

--- Page 2517 ---
Postretirement benefits
accounting, 20-23–24
costs, 23-23
definition, 6-4
types, 13-14
Post-sale costs, 13-18
Predictive value, 2-8
Preemptive privilege, 16-11
Preemptive right, 15-4
Pre-exploratory costs, 11-17
Preferability, 22-22
Preference dividends in arrears, 13-8

--- Page 2518 ---
Preference shares, 15-6, 15-9–11
accounting for, 15-11
callable, 15-10
convertible, 15-10, 16-8–9, 16-36, 16-37
cumulative, 15-10
definition, 15-4, 15-9
dividends, 16-21
features of, 15-9, 15-10–11
incremental effects, 16-37
par value, 15-10
participating, 15-10
per share effects, 16-36
redeemable, 15-10–11
reporting of, 15-11
Preferred shares, 5-11
Premiums
amortization, 14-10
bond issues, 14-6, 14-9, 14-11
charging cost, 13-20

--- Page 2519 ---
Prepaid expenses
adjusting entries for, 3-19–23
conversion of cash payments to, 3-40
decrease in, 23-14
definition, 3-19
errors, 22-25
failure to record, 22-25
increase in, 23-11
statement of financial position presentation, 5-10
worksheet entries, 23-34
Prepayments, lease, 21-29

--- Page 2520 ---
Present value, 6-2
actuarial, 20-6
amortization, 14-7–11
of annuity, 6-20–25, 6-32
of annuity due, 6-22–23, 6-32
of bond selling at discount, 14-6
of bond selling at par, 14-5
of cash flows, 6-30
of deferred annuity, 6-26–27
definition, 6-8, 6-11, 6-32
example problems, 6-23–25
formula, 6-11
of lottery payments, 6-23
measurement of, 6-29–30
of ordinary annuity, 6-20–22, 6-23–24, 6-32
single-sum problems, 6-9, 6-11–12, 6-13, 6-14, 6-32
Present value factor
formula, 6-11
ordinary annuity, 6-20
Present value of 1
definition, 6-6
table, 6-48–49
table excerpt, 6-11
Present value of $1 discounted at 5% for three periods, 6-11
Present value of an annuity due of 1, 6-6

--- Page 2521 ---
Present value of an ordinary annuity of 1
definition, 6-6
table, 6-52–53
table excerpt, 6-21
Present value test, 21-19, 21-20
examples, 21-40, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sales-type leases, 21-22
Pretax financial income, 19-3
Price-earnings ratio, 5-31
Principal, 6-4
Principal amount, 14-5
Principal-agent relationships
definition, 18-24
examples, 18-24, 18-25
issues related to, 18-25
revenue recognition, 18-24–25, 18-29
Printed coupons, 13-20
Prior period adjustments, 4-20, 22-18
Probable (term), 13-15, 19-11, 19-60
Process patents, 12-8
Procurement fraud, 24-34
Produce, agricultural, 9-8
Producers, 17-33
Product costs, 2-20, 8-10, 8-22

--- Page 2522 ---
Product information, 24-16
Product patents, 12-8
Profit margin on sales
formula, 24-38
illustration, 11-25
property, plant, and equipment, 11-25
summary, 5-31
Profitability ratios, 24-49
definition, 5-30, 24-38
formulas and use, 5-31, 24-38
Profit-sharing plans, 13-14–15
Progress toward completion, 18-35–40
Project financing arrangements, 14-24
Projected unit credit method, 20-9
Promissory notes, 7-15
Property, goods, or services
notes issued, 14-15–16
notes received, 7-18

--- Page 2523 ---
Property, plant, and equipment (PP&E), 10-2–5
accounting approaches, 10-16–20
accounting policies, 5-25
acquisition, 10-3–4
acquisition through government grants, 10-16–20
additions, 10-20–21, 10-23
analysis of, 11-25–26
asset turnover, 11-25
cash discounts, 10-11
costs, 10-3
costs of new machines, 10-14
costs of semi-trucks, 10-15
costs subsequent to acquisition, 10-20–23
definition, 5-7
depreciation, 11-3–7, 11-10
disclosures, 11-24, 24-7
disposition, 10-23–24
gains on disposal of used trucks, 10-16
global insights, 11-55–56
grants for lab equipment, 10-17–18
improvements, 10-21, 10-23
involuntary conversion of, 10-24
lab equipment, 10-17–18
losses on disposal of used machines, 10-15
lump-sum purchases, 10-12–13

--- Page 2524 ---
major characteristics, 10-3
presentation, 5-7, 11-23–24
rearrangement and reorganization, 10-21, 10-23
reconciliation schedule, 5-27
repairs, 10-22, 10-23
replacements, 10-21, 10-23, 11-10, 11-33
revaluations, 11-21–23, 11-26
sales of plant assets, 10-23–24
statement of financial position presentation, 5-7
valuation, 10-11–20, 24-36
Property dividends, 15-18, 15-19
Proportional method allocation, 15-7
Proprietary perspective, 1-7
Prospective contract modifications, 18-31
Prospective reporting, 22-15–16, 22-33

--- Page 2525 ---
Provisions. See also Liabilities
accounting for, 13-15–27, 13-32
definition, 13-15
disclosures related to, 13-26–27
environmental, 13-22–24
examples, 13-16
litigation, 13-17–18
measurement of, 13-17
onerous contract, 13-24
recognition of, 13-15–16
restructuring, 13-25–26
types of, 13-17–26
warranty, 13-18–20
Prudence, 2-9–10, 2-22
Public companies, 2-14
Published forecasts
arguments against, 24-32
arguments for, 24-31
Purchase commitments, 9-11–12
accounting for, 9-24
definition, 9-11
disclosure, 9-11
Purchase discounts, 8-11–12, 9-19

--- Page 2526 ---
Purchase option test, 21-19, 21-20
examples, 21-40, 21-42, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sales-type leases, 21-22
Purchase price, 10-3, 10-13
Purchase returns, 9-19, 9-20
Purchased goodwill, 12-11–13
Purchases
errors, 22-26
overstatement of, 22-26
Pure rate of interest, 6-29
Put options, 17-35
Q
Quadraphobia, 4-5
Qualified pension plans, 20-3

--- Page 2527 ---
Qualitative characteristics
completeness, 2-9
definition, 2-5, 2-7
enhancing qualities, 2-10–12
faithful representation, 2-9–10
free from error, 2-10
hierarchy of, 2-7
neutrality, 2-9–10
overview, 2-6–12
relevance, 2-7–9
Quality of earnings, 4-3–4
Quick or acid-test ratio
computation, 13-31
formula and use, 5-30, 13-31, 24-38
R
Rate of interest. See Interest rates

--- Page 2528 ---
Ratio analysis, 24-37–39
acid-test ratio, 5-30, 13-31, 24-38
activity ratios, 5-30, 5-31, 24-38, 24-49
cost-to-retail ratio, 9-16, 9-18
coverage ratios, 5-30, 5-31, 24-38, 24-49
current ratio, 5-30, 13-30–31, 24-38
debt-to-assets ratio, 5-31, 14-27, 24-38
financial ratios, 5-30–31
formulas and use, 5-30–31, 24-38
limitations, 24-39, 24-49
liquidity ratios, 5-30–31, 24-38, 24-49
long-term debt ratios, 14-27
payout ratio, 5-31, 15-25, 24-38
price-earnings ratio, 5-31
profitability ratios, 5-30, 5-31, 24-38, 24-49
quick or acid-test ratio, 5-30, 13-31, 24-38
types of ratios, 5-30, 24-38, 24-49
working capital ratio, 13-30
Raw materials inventory, 8-3
Reacquisition of shares, 15-11–15
Real accounts, 3-3
Real liabilities, 19-8
Realized gains
adjustments to net income, 23-23
computation, 17-27

--- Page 2529 ---
Realized losses, 23-23
Rearrangement costs, 10-20, 10-21, 10-23
Receipt of cash for future service, 3-13
Receipt of cash for services provided, 3-17
Receivables, 5-9, 7-6–10. See also Accounts receivable
analysis, 7-24–25
classification, 7-23–24
definition, 7-6
derecognition, 7-19–23
disclosure, 7-25
factoring, 7-20
global insights, 7-56–57
maturity analysis, 5-26
non-current, 7-6
non-trade, 7-6, 7-7
notes receivable, 7-6, 7-15–19
percentage-of-receivables approach, 7-13
presentation, 5-9, 7-23–24
reporting, 7-7
sales, 7-20–23
secured borrowing, 7-22–23
statement of financial position presentation, 5-9
trade, 7-6, 7-7
transfers, 7-20–23, 7-57

--- Page 2530 ---
Reclassification adjustments
definition, 17-29
note disclosure, 17-30
Recognition, 2-18
accounts receivable, 7-7
expense recognition principle, 2-20
notes receivable, 7-15–19
revenue recognition principle, 2-19–20
Reconciliation
bank balance, 7-29–31
operating segment, 24-16
pension, 20-13, 20-15, 20-18
property, plant, and equipment, 5-27
Recording
cash discounts, 7-9
estimated uncollectibles, 7-11–12
events, 3-8–9
goodwill, 12-11–13
illustration, 3-11–17
transactions, 3-8–18
write-off of uncollectible accounts, 7-12
Recoverable amount, 11-12, 12-14
Recoverable reserves, 11-19

--- Page 2531 ---
Recovery
of impairment loss, 17-25
uncollectible account, 7-12–13
Recycling adjustments
definition, 17-30
multi-period example, 17-28–30
reporting issues, 17-27–30
single-period example, 17-27–28
Redeemable preference shares, 15-10–11
Refinancing
analysis of, 13-7
criteria for, 13-7
short-term debts expected to be refinanced, 13-32
short-term obligations, 13-6–7
Refunds
measurement, 13-17
as provisions, 13-16
Registered bonds, 14-3
Registrars, 15-4
Related-party transactions, 24-8–9
Relative fair value, 10-13
Relative standalone sales value, 9-10, 9-24
Relevance, 2-7–9, 3-8–9

--- Page 2532 ---
Remeasurements
accounting, 20-15–19
definition, 20-8, 20-15
in financial statements, 20-20–21
Rent
computation, 6-18–19, 6-24–25
periodic, 6-24–25
Rent payment, 3-14
Reorganization costs, 10-20, 10-21, 10-23
Repairs
accounting for, 10-22, 10-23
definition, 10-20
major, 10-22, 10-23
ordinary, 10-22, 10-23
Replacements
accounting for, 10-23
definition, 10-20, 10-21
property, plant, and equipment, 10-21, 11-10
Repo 105 (or Repo 108 in Europe), 24-8
Report-form statement of financial position, 5-14–15

--- Page 2533 ---
Reporting
auditor’s report, 24-21–25
criteria for, 24-35
current issues, 24-31–36
discrete approach, 24-17
gross, 5-29
integral approach, 24-17
interim reports, 24-17–20
Internet financial reporting, 24-33
management’s reports, 24-26–30
net, 5-29
off-and-on, 14-25
prospective, 22-15–16, 22-33
segmented information, 24-13, 24-15–16
Reporting date, 24-43
Repurchase agreements
definition, 18-23
disclosure, 24-8
issues related to, 18-23
revenue recognition, 18-23–24, 18-29
sales with, 8-9
Research activities, 12-19

--- Page 2534 ---
Research and development (R&D)
global incentives, 12-18–19
identifying, 12-19
in-process, 12-20
recognition of, 12-21
research, 12-3
Research and development (R&D) costs
accounting for, 12-20
definition, 12-18
illustration, 12-3, 12-18
as percentage of sales, 12-18
presentation, 12-23
reporting, 12-23
samples, 12-20
similar costs, 12-21–22
Reserves
recoverable, 11-19
secret, 15-8
statement of financial position presentation, 5-12
types of restatements, 22-18
Residual interest, 15-5

--- Page 2535 ---
Residual value
amortization expense with, 12-7
definition, 11-3, 21-8
example, 21-71
guaranteed, 21-8–9, 21-10, 21-13, 21-14, 21-25, 21-26
guidelines for, 21-18
lessee accounting, 21-8–9, 21-10, 21-14–15
lessor accounting, 21-25–26
profits, 21-6
transaction price allocation, 18-15
unguaranteed, 21-9, 21-14, 21-25–26
Resource costs, 11-18–19
Responsibility statement, 24-30
Responsible investments, 12-2
Restatements, 22-2
major accounting errors that drive, 22-18
retrospective, 22-33
types of, 22-18
Restoration costs, 11-18
Restricted cash
definition, 7-4
reporting, 7-4
statement of financial position presentation, 5-11

--- Page 2536 ---
Restricted shares
disclosure of awards, 16-18, 16-19
example, 16-16–17
Restructuring
accounting for, 13-25–26
costs included/excluded from, 13-25
fair value, 14-21
notes, 14-21
Retail, 8-10
Retail franchising arrangements, 18-45
Retail inventory method, 9-15–20
calculations, 9-16
concepts, 9-16–17
conventional or LCNRV approach, 9-16–19
cost method, 9-18
evaluation of, 9-20
illustrations, 9-16, 9-18
with markups and markdowns, 9-16–19
special items, 9-19–20

--- Page 2537 ---
Retained earnings
adjustments, 22-8–9, 22-12–13
appropriated, 4-21
change in, 23-15, 23-32–34
definition, 3-3, 5-11, 15-5
increase in, 23-12
restrictions on, 4-21, 15-23
Retained earnings statements
average-cost, 22-12
combined statement of income and retained earnings, 23-33
comparative, 22-8, 22-13
definition, 4-21
illustrations, 3-30, 4-21, 22-9, 22-10, 23-33
for merchandising companies, 3-35
reporting errors, 22-19, 22-20
before and after retrospective changes, 22-8
Retirement. See Pension plans; Postretirement benefits

--- Page 2538 ---
Retrospective accounting
change approach, 22-5–13
definition, 22-4, 22-33
elective exemptions, 24-45–46
example data, 22-6, 22-11
exemptions, 24-45–46, 24-49
general steps, 22-6
impracticability, 22-14, 22-32–33
inventory methods, 22-9–12
long-term contracts, 22-6–7
preference, 22-4
required exemptions, 24-45
restatements, 22-33
retained earnings statements, 22-8, 22-13
Return on assets (ROA)
actual return on plan assets, 20-10–11
formula, 24-38
illustrations, 11-25, 11-26
property, plant, and equipment, 11-25, 11-26
summary, 5-31
Return on capital—ordinary, 5-31
Return on equity, 15-25
Return on ordinary share equity, 15-25, 24-38

--- Page 2539 ---
Return rate
high, 8-9
risk-free, 6-30
Returnable cash deposits, 13-8
Returns
purchase, 9-19
sales, 18-19–22
Revaluation, 11-21–23
as deemed cost, 24-46
of depreciable assets, 11-21–22, 11-29–32
financial statement presentation, 11-22
general rules for, 11-26
illustrations, 11-27, 11-28, 11-31, 11-32
issues, 11-22
of land, 11-21, 11-27–29
of property, plant, and equipment, 11-26
recognition of, 11-21–22
Revaluation surplus, 11-21
Revenue accounts, 13-9
Revenue bonds, 14-3
Revenue constraint, 18-12
Revenue disclosures, 18-33
Revenue from Contracts with Customers (IASB), 18-3, 18-4

--- Page 2540 ---
Revenue recognition
additional issues, 18-29
asset-liability approach, 18-4
background, 18-3
contracts and, 18-9–10
cost-recovery (zero-profit) method, 18-40–41
cost-to-cost method, 18-36
disclosure, 18-33–34
evolving issue, 18-34
example, 18-4–5
extended example, 18-5–9
five-step process, 2-19, 18-4–19
franchise agreements, 18-46
franchise rights revenue, over time, 18-47–48
franchises, 18-44–45
fundamental concepts, 18-3–9
gross method, 18-25
key concepts, 18-4
for long-term construction contracts, 18-35–40
major issues, 18-19–29
net approach, 18-25
non-cash consideration, 18-13–14
over time, 18-34–44, 18-47–48
overview, 18-1–2
percentage-of-completion method, 18-35–40

--- Page 2541 ---
presentation, 18-29–33
standard for, 18-4
transfer of control and, 18-29
types of restatements, 22-18
variable consideration, 18-11
when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied, 18-8–9, 18-
17–18
Revenue recognition principle, 2-19–20, 18-4
Revenue test, 24-15
Revenue transactions, basic, 18-9
Revenues
accrued, 3-19
conversion of cash receipts to, 3-39, 3-40
definition, 2-41
disaggregation of, 18-33
errors, 22-25
franchise, over time, 18-48
franchise rights, 18-47–48
presentation, 18-29–33
sales or service, 4-18
unbilled, 18-39
unearned, 3-19, 13-8–9, 22-25
Reversals
deferred tax assets after, 19-11
deferred tax liabilities after, 19-7
temporary differences, 19-9

--- Page 2542 ---
Reversing differences, 19-13–14
Reversing entries
accruals illustration, 3-42–43
deferrals illustration, 3-43–44
definition, 3-33
guidelines for, 3-44
using, 3-42–44
Review engagements, 24-20
Right-of-use assets
computation, 21-29
disclosure by lessee, 21-32
Right-of-use cost analysis, 21-29–30
Risk management, 17-43
Risk-free rate of return, 6-30
S
Safe harbor rule, 24-32
Safe (tax) havens, 19-1–2
Salary payments
accrued salaries and wages, 3-27
adjustment for salaries and wage expense, 3-27–28
executive pay components, 16-2–3
recording process illustrated, 3-16

--- Page 2543 ---
Sale-leasebacks. See also Leasing
accounting issues, 21-36–37, 21-46
advantages, 21-36
comparative entries, 21-38
definition, 21-35
example, 21-37–39
financing transaction, 21-37
illustration, 21-35
lease classification tests, 21-38
lessee accounting for, 21-46
reasons for, 21-36
sale transactions, 21-36–37

--- Page 2544 ---
Sales
of bonds, 17-7, 17-9
boomerang, 18-22
cash, 18-21–22
on consignment, 18-26
credit, 18-20–21
of equipment, 23-14
of equity investments, 17-15
failed, 7-21, 21-37
with guarantee, 7-21–22
of HFCS securities, 17-9–10
with high rates of return, 8-9
lump-sum, 15-7–8
of plant assets, 10-23–24
profit margin on, 11-25
receivables, 7-20–23
relative standalone sales value, 9-10, 9-24
with repurchase agreements, 8-9
sale-leaseback transactions, 21-36–37
75% of combined sales test, 24-15
special agreements, 8-8–9
stimulation of, 21-5
of treasury shares, 15-14
without guarantee, 7-21
Sales discounts, 7-8–9, 9-19

--- Page 2545 ---
Sales or service revenues, 4-18
Sales returns and allowances
accounting for, 7-9–10, 9-19
cash sales, 18-21–22
credit sales, 18-20–21
illustration, 9-20
income statement reporting, 18-21, 18-22
revenue recognition, 18-19–22, 18-29
statement of financial position reporting, 18-21, 18-22
Sales taxes payable, 13-10
Sales-type leases
accounting for (lessor), 21-21–25
computation of lease amounts, 21-25
example, 21-22–25
guaranteed residual value, 21-26
lease classification tests, 21-22
unguaranteed residual value, 21-26
Salvage value, 11-3. See also Residual value
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 2-22, 3-70, 7-26
Sarkozy, Nicolas, 1-13
SARs. See Share-appreciation rights
Seasonality
definition, 24-18
example, 24-19
interim reporting, 24-18–20

--- Page 2546 ---
Secret reserves, 15-8
Secured bonds, 14-3
Secured borrowing, 7-22–23
Securities
antidilutive, 16-25, 16-28–29
available-for-sale, 17-78
compound, 24-46
convertible, 16-25–26
debt, 17-4, 17-77–78
definition, 17-3
dilutive, 16-3–9, 16-24
equity component, 16-10
exchanging, 14-19–20
held-for-collection and selling (HFCS), 17-9–10
held-to-maturity, 17-78
host, 17-42
hybrid, 17-42
lump-sum issuance, 15-7, 15-8
mortgage-backed (MBS), 17-38
portfolio of, 17-9
share warrants issued with, 16-10–11
shares issued with, 15-7–8
single security investments, 17-7–8
trading, 17-5, 17-11, 17-78
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 1-24

--- Page 2547 ---
Securitization, 6-22, 7-26
Segmented disclosures
basic principles, 24-14
definition, 24-13
illustrations, 24-12, 24-16
measurement principles, 24-15
objective of, 24-13
reporting requirements, 24-15–16
support for, 24-13
Self-constructed assets, 10-5
Self-insurance, 13-26
Selling and administrative expenses, 4-18
Selling price
gross profit on, 9-14
standalone, 18-15
Semi-truck costs
basis of, 10-16
computation, 10-15
Serial bonds, 14-3
Service condition, 16-15
Service costs
definition, 20-8
determination, 20-9
past, 20-13–15
Service life, 11-3–4

--- Page 2548 ---
Service period, 16-14
Service revenue
computation, 3-39–40
conversion of cash receipts to, 3-40
summary, 4-18
unearned, 3-40
Service sponsor–retailer franchising arrangements, 18-45
Services
information about, 24-16
notes issued for property, goods, or services, 14-15–16
notes received for, 7-18
performance obligations, 18-16–17
Service-type warranty
definition, 18-27
examples, 13-20, 18-27
overview, 13-19–20
Settlement
definition, 20-13
net, 17-37
75% of combined sales test, 24-15
Share appreciation rights, 16-31
Share capital, 5-11

--- Page 2549 ---
Share dividends
definition, 15-20–21
effects of, 15-21
fair value approach, 15-20
par value method, 15-20
vs share splits, 15-22
small, 15-20
weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding, 16-22–23
Share options
accounting debate, 16-18
compensation plans, 16-12–19
definition, 16-2–3, 16-12
diluted EPS, 16-27–28
disclosure of, 16-18, 16-19
employee share-purchase plans (ESPPs), 16-17–18
incremental effects, 16-36
per share effect of, 16-35
restricted shares, 16-16–17
types of restatements, 22-18
warrants, 16-10
Share premium, 5-11, 15-6
Share rights, 15-4, 16-11–12

--- Page 2550 ---
Share splits
definition, 15-21
effects of, 15-21
effects on financial statement elements, 15-22
vs share dividends, 15-22
weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding, 16-22–23
Share system, 15-3–4
Share warrants
accounting for, 16-9–12
definition, 15-4
illustration, 16-10–11
issued with other securities, 16-10–11
summary analysis, 16-11
Share-appreciation rights (SARs)
accounting for, 16-31–32
advantages of, 16-31–32
compensation expense, 16-33
definition, 16-31
equity awards, 16-32
example, 16-33–35
share-based liability awards, 16-32–33

--- Page 2551 ---
Share-based compensation
adjustment, 16-15
adjustments to net income, 23-24–25
basic entries, 16-14–15
definition, 6-4, 16-12
elements of, 16-13
example, 16-14–15
exercise, 16-15
expiration, 16-15
fair value method, 16-13
measurement of, 16-13–14
plans, 16-12–19
recognition of, 16-14–15
Share-based liability awards, 16-32–33
Shareholders
investment of cash by, 3-12
ordinary, 16-21
Shareholders’ equity, 5-11, 20-24. See also Equity
Share-price appreciation, 16-32

--- Page 2552 ---
Shares
additional, 16-11–12
B, 15-5
book value per, 5-31, 15-26, 15-27–28, 24-38
buybacks, 15-11–15
common, 5-11
contingently issuable, 16-28
convertible, 16-8–9
dividends, 16-21
earnings per. See Earnings per share (EPS)
employee share-purchase plans (ESPPs), 16-17–18
employee stock-purchase plans, 16-60
executive pay components, 16-2–3
income available to holders, 16-21, 16-24
incremental, 16-27
issuance, 5-28, 10-13, 15-6–9
issuance in non-cash transactions, 15-8–9
issuance with other securities, 15-7–8
no-par, 15-6–7
ordinary, 15-4, 15-6, 15-25, 16-21–23, 16-24, 16-26, 16-28
outstanding, 15-13
par value, 15-6, 15-10
parenthetical disclosure of, 5-28
preference, 15-4, 15-6, 15-9–11, 16-8–9, 16-21
preferred, 5-11

--- Page 2553 ---
reacquisition of, 15-11–15
restricted, 16-16–17, 16-18, 16-19
return on, 15-25
treasury, 5-11, 15-12–13, 15-14, 15-15
treasury-share method, 16-27–28, 16-35
watered, 15-8
weighted-average, 16-21–23, 16-26
Shipping points, 8-8
Shortages
abnormal, 9-20
normal, 9-19
Short-term borrowing, 7-4
Short-term debt expected to be refinanced, 13-32
Short-term investments, 5-10
Short-term leases
definition, 21-17, 21-45
examples, 21-17
Short-term notes payable, 14-12
non-trade, 23-27
Short-term obligations, 13-6–7
Short-term paper
classification of, 7-5
reporting, 7-3
Short-termism, 24-20
SIC (Standard Industrial Classification), 1-9

--- Page 2554 ---
Sick pay, 13-13–14
Significant judgments, 18-33
Significant non-cash activities, 5-21
Significant non-cash transactions, 23-28
Signing contracts, 3-15
Simple capital
definition, 16-20
earnings per share, 16-20–24, 16-30, 16-35
Simple interest
definition, 6-32
equation, 6-5
Single security investments, 17-7–8
Single-sum problems
future value, 6-9–10, 6-16
for other unknowns, 6-13–14
present value, 6-9, 6-11–12
Small- and medium-sized entities (SMEs), 1-2, 1-8, 24-5
Social Security taxes, 13-12
Social Welfare taxes, 13-12
Soft assets, 1-14
Solvency, 5-4, 5-17
Special assessments, 10-4
Special disclosures, 23-28–29
Special journals, 3-10
Special purpose entities (SPEs), 14-24

--- Page 2555 ---
Special sales agreements, 8-8–9
Special transactions or events, 24-8–10
Specific identification, 8-12–13
Speculation, 17-35–37, 17-44
Speculators
definition, 17-33
derivatives use, 17-33–34
Spending, 10-1–2
Spot price, 17-41
Standalone sales value, relative, 9-10, 9-24
Standalone selling price, 18-15
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC), 1-9
Standard-setting organizations, 1-7–1-12
Start-up costs, 12-21–22
Stated value, 15-7
Stated (par) value method, 15-12

--- Page 2556 ---
Statement of cash flows, 5-16–24, 23-2–6
additional information, 5-24–29
adjustments, 23-16
basic format, 5-17
classification of cash flows, 23-3–5
comprehensive, 5-21
content, 5-16–18
data sources, 23-6–7
definition, 3-3
final preparation, 23-38
format, 5-17, 23-6
global insights, 5-56–57, 23-65–67
illustrations, 5-20, 22-10, 22-11, 23-6, 23-7–15, 23-25, 23-26, 23-
38
income statement data, 5-19
indirect method, 23-16
notes, 5-24–27
Operating Activities section, 23-14, 23-21, 23-29
preparation, 5-18–21, 23-6–22, 23-38
preparation steps, 23-7, 23-39
purpose, 5-16, 5-18, 23-2–3
sources of information, 5-18–19, 23-16, 23-39
special problems, 23-22–29, 23-39
usefulness, 5-21–24, 23-3
worksheets, 23-30–38
Statement of cash receipts and disbursements, 3-41

--- Page 2557 ---
Statement of changes in equity, 4-23–24
illustrations, 4-24, 15-24, 17-28
presentation, 15-24
Statement of comprehensive income
definition, 4-3
illustrations, 17-28, 17-29, 17-30
presentation of equity investments at fair value, 17-17
presentation of revaluations on, 11-22
Statement of Directors’ responsibilities, 24-30

--- Page 2558 ---
Statement of financial position, 5-3–14
account form, 5-14
accrual-basis, 3-38
accumulated depreciation, 3-23
accumulated other comprehensive income, 4-24
additional information, 5-24–29
additional notes, 5-26
cash and cash equivalents, 5-11
cash-basis, 3-38
classification, 5-5–14
comparative, 5-19, 23-6, 23-10, 23-13, 23-32
credit sales with returns and allowances, 18-21
current liabilities, 5-13
deferred tax assets, 19-10
deferred tax liabilities, 19-7
deferred taxes, 19-22–23, 19-31, 19-34
definition, 3-3, 5-3
effects of dividends on, 15-22
effects of share splits on, 15-22
elements of, 5-5
equity, 5-12, 15-22–23
equity investments at fair value, 17-17
error correction, 22-29
error effects, 8-17, 8-18
errors, 22-19, 22-23, 22-24–27, 22-32

--- Page 2559 ---
fair value hedge, 17-40, 17-47
format, 5-6
global insights, 5-56–57
gross versus reporting, 5-29
HFCS securities, 17-10
illustrations, 12-11, 15-16, 22-10, 22-11, 23-17
intangible assets, 5-7
inventories, 5-9, 17-39
lease information in, 21-30
lessee accounting, 21-12
lessor accounting, 21-24
limitations, 5-4
long-term investments, 5-7
for merchandising companies, 3-36
mineral resources, 11-19
new model, 5-2–3
non-current liabilities, 5-13
notes, 5-24–27
opening IFRS, 24-43, 24-44
prepaid expenses, 5-10
preparation, 3-31, 5-14–15
preparation from adjusted trial balance, 3-31
property, plant, and equipment, 5-7
receivables, 5-9
report form, 5-14–15

--- Page 2560 ---
reserves, 5-12
restricted cash, 5-11
revaluations on, 11-22
sales returns and allowances, 18-21, 18-22
short-term investments, 5-10
usefulness, 5-3–4
volatility, 20-24
warning signals, 5-14
worksheet columns, 3-47
worksheet to correct errors, 22-29
Stewardship, 1-6, 2-6
Straight-line method, 11-6, 11-33
Strict cash basis accounting, 3-37
Strike price, 17-35
Subsequent events
adjusted, 24-11
disclosure of, 24-10–12
global insights, 24-70–71
non-adjusted, 24-11
time periods, 24-10
Subsidiaries
definition, 17-21
non-consolidated, 14-23–24
Subsidiary ledger, 3-3
Successful-efforts concept, 11-18

--- Page 2561 ---
Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, 5-25
Sum-of-the-years’-digits depreciation method, 11-6, 11-7
Super deductions, 12-18–19
Supersession, 11-4
Supplementary information, 2-21
Suppliers: cash payments to, 23-19–20
Supplies
adjustment for, 3-20, 3-21
purchase on credit, 3-15
Supplies inventory, 8-4
Supporting schedules, 4-8
Sustainability, 12-1–2
Sustainability reporting, 24-29
Swap transactions
definition, 17-45
illustration, 17-45
interest rate swaps, 17-45, 17-46, 17-47–48
presentation, 17-47–48
T
Tax accounting, 19-3
Tax benefit (tax effect)
current, 19-36
example, 19-35–36
leasing, 21-5

--- Page 2562 ---
Tax carryforwards, 19-27
Tax credits, 12-18–19
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), 7-1
Tax deductions, warranty, 19-8
Tax expenses. See also Income tax expenses
computation, 19-6, 19-7
current, 19-6, 19-27
deferred, 19-6
Tax (safe) havens, 19-1–2
Tax rates
future, 19-16–17
global, 19-17–18
Tax reconciliation, 19-25–26
Tax reporting income, 19-4
Taxable amounts
definition, 19-5
future, 19-5–8
Taxable income
computation, 19-29, 19-32
definition, 19-3, 19-28
sources of, 19-21
Taxable temporary differences, 19-13, 19-28

--- Page 2563 ---
Taxes
based on future rates, 19-17
deferred, 19-4, 19-5–12, 19-17, 19-22–27, 23-23
future deductible amounts, 19-8–11
future taxable amounts, 19-5–8
income before, 4-12, 19-3
income taxes. See Income taxes
intraperiod allocation, 4-15–16, 19-23, 19-28–34
note disclosure of, 23-29
reporting, 19-9, 23-29
restatements, 22-18
sales taxes payable, 13-10
Social Security taxes, 13-12
Social Welfare taxes, 13-12
super deductions, 12-18–19
uncertain tax positions, 19-22
value-added taxes (VAT) payable, 13-9–11
Taxonomy, IFRS, 24-33
Tax-planning strategy, 19-28
TCJA (Tax Cuts and Jobs Act), 7-1
Technology-related intangible assets, 12-8–10

--- Page 2564 ---
Temporary differences
accounts receivable, 19-5
classification, 19-22
cumulative, 19-16
deductible, 19-13, 19-28
definition, 19-5, 19-28
examples, 19-14, 19-15–16
originating, 19-13–14
reversal of, 19-5, 19-9
reversing, 19-13–14
taxable, 19-13, 19-28
warranty liability, 19-8
Temporary investments, 7-3
Term bonds, 14-3
Termination options
illustration, 21-9
lease payments related to, 21-9
Time, 6-4

--- Page 2565 ---
Time diagrams
annuity due, 6-18
basic illustration, 6-9
bonds issued at discount, 14-6
bonds issued at par, 14-5
future value annuity due, 6-19
future value of ordinary annuity, 6-18, 6-19
interest-bearing note, 7-17
notes issued at face value, 7-15
ordinary annuity for college fund, 6-24
present value of deferred annuity, 6-26, 6-27
present value of lottery payments, 6-23
unknown number of periods, 6-13
zero-interest-bearing note, 7-16
Time periods
assumptions, 2-15
number of, 6-8
Time value, 17-35

--- Page 2566 ---
Time value of money
accounts receivable and, 7-10
applications, 6-3–4
basic concepts, 6-3–9
bond discounts or premiums, 6-28–29
deferred annuities, 6-25–27
definition, 6-2
future value. See Future value (FV)
long-term bonds, 6-27–28
present value. See Present value (PV)
transaction price and, 18-13
Timeliness, 1-14, 2-11
Times interest earned
computation, 14-27
formula, 24-38
summary, 5-31
Total comprehensive income, 24-47
Total income tax expense, 19-31, 19-34
Trade accounts payable, 13-4
Trade discounts, 7-8
Trade name, 12-6
Trade notes payable, 13-4
Trade practice, 9-21
Trade receivables, 7-6, 7-7

--- Page 2567 ---
Trademarks
amortization, 23-35
definition, 12-6
Trading
corporate barter, 9-15
on equity, 15-25
Trading investments
accounting for, 17-5, 17-11, 17-22, 17-78
classification, 17-78
definition, 17-5
equity holdings less than 20%, 17-14–18, 17-22
fair value adjustment, 17-11
Trading securities, 5-6
Transaction approach, 4-5–6

--- Page 2568 ---
Transaction price
allocation to separate performance obligations, 18-8, 18-15–17
consideration paid or payable to customers, 18-14
definition, 7-8, 18-11
determination of, 18-7, 18-11–14
extended payment terms, 18-13
measurement of, 7-8
non-cash consideration, 18-13–14
revenue constraint, 18-12
upfront fee considerations, 18-28
variable consideration, 7-8–10, 18-11–12
volume discount, 18-14

--- Page 2569 ---
Transactions
analysis of, 23-31–37
anticipated, 17-41
basic revenue, 3-9–18, 18-9
definition, 3-3
effects on equity accounts, 3-7
identifying and recording, 3-8–9
journalizing, 3-9–10
non-cash, 15-8–9
parking, 8-9
recording and summarizing, 3-9–18
recording process illustrated, 3-11–17
related-party, 24-8–9
significant non-cash, 23-28
special, 24-8–10
swap, 17-45, 17-46, 17-47–48
Transfer agents, 15-4
Transfer of assets, 14-20
Transfer of control, 18-29
Transfer of ownership test
definition, 21-19, 21-20
examples, 21-40, 21-42, 21-71
for operating leases, 21-27
for sales-type leases, 21-22

--- Page 2570 ---
Transfers
accounting, 7-23
receivables, 7-20, 7-57
Transfers-in, 9-19
Transit: goods in, 8-8
Travel advances
classification, 7-5
reporting, 7-3
Treasury shares
cost accounting method, 15-12
definition, 5-11
equity with, 15-13
par (stated) value accounting method, 15-12
purchase of, 15-12–13
retiring, 15-15
sale above cost, 15-14
sale below cost, 15-14
Treasury-share method, 16-27–28, 16-35
Trial balance, 3-17–18
adjusted, 3-3, 3-29, 3-47
definition, 3-3
illustration, 3-18
post-closing, 3-3, 3-33
unadjusted, 3-18
worksheet columns, 3-46

--- Page 2571 ---
True and fair view, 1-12
Tweedie, David, 21-2
Two statement approach, 4-22, 4-23
U
Unbilled revenue, 18-39
Uncertain tax positions, 19-22
Uncertainties, 9-2
Uncollectible accounts
allowance method for, 7-11–14
direct write-off method for, 7-11
estimation, 7-11–12
recovery, 7-12–13
valuation, 7-11–14
write-off, 7-12
Underlyings, 17-37, 17-46
Understandability, 2-11
Understatement, 22-25

--- Page 2572 ---
Unearned revenues
accounting for, 13-8
adjustment for, 3-20, 3-23–24
conversion of cash receipts to, 3-40
current liabilities, 13-8–9
definition, 3-19
errors, 22-25
illustration, 13-9
understatement of, 22-25
Unguaranteed residual value
definition, 21-9
lessee accounting, 21-14
lessor accounting, 21-25–26
sales-type leases, 21-26
United Kingdom: R&D incentives, 12-19
United States
government debt, 14-2
R&D incentives, 12-19
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 2-22, 3-70, 7-26
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA), 7-1
Units-of-delivery method, 18-35
Units-of-production approach, 11-5, 11-18

--- Page 2573 ---
Unprofitable contracts
construction expenses, 18-43
Construction in Process account, 18-44
losses on, 18-43–44
revenue recognition, 18-43
Unrealized gain
adjustments to net income, 23-23–24
computation, 17-27
Unrealized losses, 23-23–24
Unsecured bonds, 14-3
Upfront fees
definition, 18-28
non-refundable, 18-28, 18-29
transaction price considerations, 18-28
U.S. GAAP (generally accepted accounting principles)
deferred taxation, 19-59
employee stock-purchase plans, 16-60
impairment measurement, 11-55, 11-56
inventory presentation and disclosure, 9-43
leases, 21-69–73
pensions, 20-45
terminology, 4-44
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 1-24

--- Page 2574 ---
Useful life
change in estimated, 22-17
indefinite, 12-4, 12-5
limited (finite), 12-4
V
Valuation
of accounts receivable, 7-10–14
of bonds payable, 14-4–7
of current assets, 5-8
of debt investments, 17-4
decrease below historical cost, 11-27–28, 11-30–31
increase, 11-27, 11-29–30
of intangible assets, 12-3–4
intrinsic, 17-35
of inventories, 8-1–42, 9-1–44
of long-term bonds, 6-27–28
of notes receivable, 7-19
of property, plant, and equipment, 10-11–20

--- Page 2575 ---
Valuation bases
actuarial present value, 20-6
book value, 10-16
book value per share, 5-31, 15-26, 15-27–28, 24-38
carrying value, 14-7
fair value, 10-16, 14-21, 17-4, 17-12, 17-31
fair value hedge, 17-38–40, 17-45–47
fair value less costs to sell, 11-12
future value, 6-8
lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV), 9-3–7, 9-16–19
net realizable value (NRV), 9-3, 9-5–6, 9-7–10, 9-23
present value, 6-2, 6-8
purchase commitments and, 9-11–12
relative fair value, 10-13
relative standalone sales value, 9-10, 9-24
residual value, 11-3
salvage value, 11-3
stated value, 15-7
time value, 6-2, 6-3–9, 17-35
time value of money, 18-13

--- Page 2576 ---
Valuation methods
allowance method, 7-11–14
cost-basis approach, 8-1–42
direct write-off, 7-11
fair value, 14-22–23, 16-13
fair value adjustment, 17-8, 17-9
income approach, 10-12
market approach, 10-12
master valuation approach, 12-12
with-and-without method, 16-4
Value in use
computation, 11-14
definition, 2-18
impairment loss calculation based on, 11-14
Value-added taxes (VAT) payable, 13-9–11
Value-in-use, 11-12
Variable consideration, 7-8–10, 18-11–12
Variable lease payments, 21-8
Variable-charge approach, 11-5
Variable-rate mortgages, 14-18
VAT (value-added taxes) payable, 13-9–11
Verifiability, 2-11–12
Verification
direct, 2-11
indirect, 2-11

--- Page 2577 ---
Vertical percentage analysis, 24-41
Vested benefit obligations, 20-6, 20-7, 20-26
Vested benefits, 20-6
Vested rights, 13-13
Viability, economic, 12-4, 12-43
Virtual certainty, 13-29
Virtual companies, 2-14
Volatility, 20-24–25
Volume discounts, 18-14
W
Wage expenses
accrued salaries and wages, 3-27
adjustment for, 3-27–28
Warning signals, 5-14

--- Page 2578 ---
Warranties
assurance-type, 13-18, 13-19, 13-20, 18-26, 18-27
definition, 13-18
examples, 13-20, 18-27
expected cash outflows, 6-30
measurement of, 13-17
as provisions, 13-16, 13-18–20
revenue recognition, 18-26–28, 18-29
service-type, 13-19–20, 18-27
share, 16-10–11
tax deductions, 19-8
temporary liability differences, 19-8
types of, 13-18–19, 18-26–27
Warrants
definition, 16-9
diluted EPS, 16-27–28
issuance situations, 16-9–10
share, 15-4, 16-9–12
Watered shares, 15-8
Weighted-average method, 8-13–14
Weighted-average ordinary shares, 16-26
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding, 16-21–23
With-and-without method, 16-4
Work in process inventory, 8-3

--- Page 2579 ---
Working capital
changes in, 23-27
definition, 5-14
minimal, 15-16
Working capital ratio, 13-30
Worksheets
adjustments, 3-46–47
columns, 3-46–47
to correct income and statement of financial position errors, 22-
29
financial statement preparation from, 3-44–45, 3-47
format, 23-31
guidelines for using, 23-30–31
income statement columns, 3-47
pension, 20-11–13, 20-16–19
preparation of, 23-31
statement of cash flows, 23-30–38
statement of financial position columns, 3-47
trial balance columns, 3-46
use of, 3-44–45, 23-30–38
Write-offs
goodwill, 12-13
resource costs, 11-18–19
uncollectible accounts, 7-12
X

--- Page 2580 ---
XBRL (eXtensible Business Reporting Language), 1-14, 24-33
Y
Yield, effective, 6-8, 14-6
Z
Zero-interest debenture bonds, 14-3
Zero-interest-bearing notes
definition, 7-15
issued, 13-5–6
long-term notes payable, 14-12–13
recognition, 7-16–17
time diagrams, 7-16, 14-13
Zero-profit method, 18-40–41
Z-score, 5-14

--- Page 2581 ---
WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
