CHAPTER 21
Accounting for Leases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the environment related to leasing transactions.
2. Explain the accounting for leases by lessees.
3. Explain the accounting for leases by lessors.
4. Discuss the accounting and reporting for special features of lease
arrangements.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that
are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 21
The following opening story highlights the substantial impact the new leasing
standard will have on companies’ statements of financial position. In this
chapter, we discuss the accounting and reporting issues related to leases
under this new standard. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.
Times Are A-Changing
Leasing has grown tremendously in popularity. Today, it is the fastest growing
form of capital investment. Instead of borrowing money to buy an airplane,
computer, nuclear core, or satellite, a company makes periodic payments to lease
these assets. Even gambling casinos lease their slot machines. Companies that

--- Page 1891 ---
lease tend to be smaller and high growth, and are in technology-oriented
industries.
A classic example is the airline industry. Many travelers on airlines such as
British Airways (GRB), Cathay Pacific (CHN), and Japan Airlines (JPN)
believe these airlines own the planes on which they are flying. Often, this is not
the case. Airlines have leased many of their airplanes due to the favorable
accounting treatment they received if they leased rather than purchased. The
following chart shows the off-balance-sheet lease percentages for a number of
major international airlines, just before the issuance of a new lease accounting
standard in 2016.
The same has held true for many other industries as well. What was this favorable
accounting treatment? The previous IASB standard on leasing depended on
whether a lease qualified as an operating lease or a finance lease. In an operating
lease, companies did not report an asset on their statement of financial position
for the item they leased, nor did they report a related liability for their lease
obligation. Only if the company had a finance lease would companies have to
report an asset and a related liability on the statement of financial position.
However, in 2016 the IASB issued a new standard on leasing that mandates that
all companies will have to report both assets and related liabilities for practically
all lease arrangements.
Companies have implemented the new rules in 2019 and 2020. Some airlines are
seeing a silver lining to the new rules, as a number of their leases involve variable
payments, which under the new rules are not subject to capitalization.
Nonetheless, most companies will see a significant effect on their reported assets
and liabilities. For example, retailers such as Marks and Spencer plc (GBR) and

--- Page 1892 ---
Carrefour SA (FRA) are experiencing substantial increases in their debt ratios,
such as debt to equity and debt to operating income, as a result of the new
standard. Overall, a significant number of retailers are seeing an increase of over
25 percent in their reported debt. Sir David Tweedie, the IASB’s previous
chairman, is known for saying that one day he would like to fly on an airplane that
actually appears on that company’s statement of financial position. Well, Sir
David, get ready because your wish is coming true.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a
targeted summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice
questions with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and
practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
The Leasing Environment
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the environment related to leasing transactions.
A lease is a contractual agreement between a lessor and a lessee. This
arrangement gives the lessee the right to use specific property, which is owned by
the lessor, for a specified period of time. In return for the use of the property, the
lessee makes rental payments over the lease term to the lessor.
A Look at the Lessee
Aristotle once said, “Wealth does not lie in ownership but in the use of things!”
Clearly, many global companies have decided that Aristotle is right, as they have
become heavily involved in leasing assets rather than owning them. For example,
according to a recent Global Leasing Report (Brendan Gleeson, White Clarke
Group, 2019), the top 50 companies reported leasing volume exceeding $1.3
trillion. Three regions, North America, Europe, and Asia, account for more than 90
percent of total lease volume. Remember that these statistics are just for
equipment leasing. Add in real estate leasing, which is probably larger, and we are
talking about a very large and growing business, one that was at least in part
driven by accounting.
What types of assets are being leased? As the opening story indicated, any type of
equipment can be leased, such as railcars, helicopters, bulldozers, barges, CT
scanners and computers. Illustration 21.1 summarizes what several major
companies are leasing.

--- Page 1893 ---
Company
Description
Carrefour
(FRA)
“Stores not fully owned are rented under leasing agreements. The
Group also owns shopping centers, mainly anchored by its
hypermarkets and supermarkets, that are rented out.”
Ahold
Delhaize
Group
(NLD/BEL)
“Delhaize Group operates a significant number of its stores under
finance lease arrangements. Various properties leased are
(partially or in full) subleased to third parties, where the Group is
therefore acting as a lessor. Lease terms (including reasonably
certain renewal options) generally range from 1 to 36 years with
renewal options ranging from 3 to 30 years.”
Diageo
(GBR)
“The company owns or leases land and buildings throughout the
world. Diageo’s largest individual facility, in terms of net book
value of property, is St James’s Gate brewery in Dublin.
Approximately 96% by value of the group’s properties are owned
and approximately 3% are held under leases running for 50 years
or longer.”
Marks and
Spencer plc
(GBR)
“The Group leases various stores, offices, warehouses and
equipment under non-cancellable lease agreements. The leases
have varying terms, escalation clauses and renewal rights.”
McDonald’s
Corp. (USA)
“The Company was the lessee at 15,235 restaurant locations
through ground leases (the Company leases the land and the
Company or franchisee owns the building) and through improved
leases (the Company leases land and buildings).”
RELX
(GBR/NLD)
“The company leases various properties, principally offices and
warehouses, which have varying terms and renewal rights that are
typical to the territory in which they are located.”
ILLUSTRATION 21.1 What Do Companies Lease?
The largest group of leased equipment involves information technology
equipment, followed by assets in the transportation area (trucks, aircraft, rail),
and then construction and agriculture.
Advantages of Leasing—Lessees
From the perspective of the lessee, leasing can provide significant advantages,
such as the following:
1. 100% financing at fixed rates. Leases are often signed without requiring
any money down from the lessee. This helps the lessee conserve scarce cash—
an especially desirable feature for new and developing companies. In
addition, lease payments often remain fixed, which protects the lessee against

--- Page 1894 ---
inflation and increases in the cost of money. The following comment explains
why companies choose a lease instead of a conventional loan: “Our local bank
finally came up to 80 percent of the purchase price but wouldn’t go any
higher, and they wanted a floating interest rate. We just couldn’t afford the
down payment, and we needed to lock in a final payment rate we knew we
could live with.”
2. Protection against obsolescence. Leasing equipment reduces risk of
obsolescence to the lessee and in many cases passes the risk of residual value
to the lessor. For example, Perrigo Company (IRL) (a pharmaceutical
maker) leases computers. Under the lease agreement, Perrigo may turn in an
old computer for a new model at any time, canceling the old lease and writing
a new one. The lessor adds the cost of the new lease to the balance due on the
old lease, less the old computer’s trade-in value. As one treasurer remarked,
“Our instinct is to purchase.” But if a new computer is likely to come along in
a short time, “then leasing is just a heck of a lot more convenient than
purchasing.” Naturally, the lessor also protects itself by requiring the lessee to
pay higher rental payments or provide additional payments if the lessee does
not maintain the asset.
3. Flexibility. Lease agreements may contain less restrictive provisions than
other debt agreements. Innovative lessors can tailor a lease agreement to the
lessee’s special needs. For instance, the duration of the lease—the lease term
—may be anything from a short period of time to the entire expected
economic life of the asset. The rental payments may be level from year to
year, or they may increase or decrease in amount. The payment amount may
be predetermined or may vary with sales, the prime interest rate, or some
other factor. In most cases, the rent is set to enable the lessor to recover the
cost of the asset plus a fair return over the life of the lease.
4. Less costly financing. Some companies find leasing cheaper than other
forms of financing. For example, start-up companies in depressed industries
or companies in low tax brackets may lease to claim tax benefits that they
might otherwise lose. Depreciation deductions offer no benefit to companies
that have little if any taxable income. Through leasing, the leasing companies
or financial institutions use these tax benefits. They can then pass some of
these tax benefits back to the user of the asset in the form of lower rental
payments.
A Look at the Lessor
Who are the lessors that own the property being leased? They generally fall into
one of three categories:
1. Banks.

--- Page 1895 ---
2. Captive leasing companies.
3. Independents.
According to recent data from the 2019 Equipment Leasing & Finance Industry
Horizon Report on new business volume by lessor type, banks hold about 43
percent of the market, followed by captives at 33 percent. Independents and
others had the remaining 24 percent of new business.
Banks
Banks are the largest players in the leasing business. They have low-cost funds,
which give them the advantage of being able to purchase assets at less cost than
their competitors. Banks have been aggressive in the leasing markets. Deciding
that there is money to be made in leasing, banks have expanded their product
lines in this area. Finally, leasing transactions are now quite standardized, which
gives banks an advantage because they do not have to be as innovative in
structuring lease arrangements. Thus, banks like Credit Suisse (CHE), Chase
(USA), Barclays (GBR), and Deutsche Bank (DEU) have substantial leasing
subsidiaries.
Captive Leasing Companies
Captive leasing companies are subsidiaries whose primary business is to perform
leasing operations for the parent company. Companies like CNH Capital (NLD)
(for CNH Global), BMW Financial Services (DEU) (for BMW), and IBM
Global Financing (USA) (for IBM) facilitate the sale of products to consumers.
For example, suppose that Ivanhoe Mines Ltd. (CAN) wants to acquire a
number of earthmovers from CNH Global. In this case, CNH Capital will offer to
structure the transaction as a lease rather than as a purchase. Thus, CNH Capital
provides the financing rather than an outside financial institution.
Captive leasing companies have the point-of-sale advantage in finding leasing
customers. That is, as soon as CNH Global receives a possible equipment order, its
leasing subsidiary can quickly develop a lease-financing arrangement.
Furthermore, the captive lessor has product knowledge that gives it an advantage
when financing the parent’s product. The current trend is for captives to focus
primarily on their companies’ products rather than do general lease financing. For
example, Boeing Capital (USA) and UPS Capital (USA) are two captives that
have left the general finance business to focus exclusively on their parent
companies’ products.
Independents
Independents are the final category of lessors. Their market share has dropped
fairly dramatically as banks and captive leasing companies have become more

--- Page 1896 ---
aggressive in the lease-financing area. Independents do not have point-of-sale
access, nor do they have a low cost of funds advantage. What they are often good
at is developing innovative contracts for lessees. In addition, they are starting to
act as captive finance companies for some companies that do not have leasing
subsidiaries. For example, AerCap (IRL) is one of the world’s largest independent
lessors.
Advantages of Leasing—Lessors
Lessors find leasing attractive because:
1. It often provides profitable interest margins.
2. It can stimulate sales of a lessor’s product whether it be from a dealer
(lessor) or a manufacturer (lessor).
3. It often provides tax benefits to various parties in the lease, which enhances
the return to all the parties involved, including the lessor. To illustrate,
Airbus (FRA) might sell one of its A320 planes to a wealthy investor who
does not need a plane but could use the tax benefit. The investor (the lessor)
then leases the plane to a foreign airline, to which the tax benefit is of no use.
Everyone gains. Airbus sells its airplane, the investor receives the tax benefit,
and the foreign airline receives a lower rental rate because the lessor is able
to use the tax benefit.
4. It can provide a high residual value to the lessor upon the return of the
property at the end of the lease term. Residual values can sometimes provide
large profits. Citigroup (USA) at one time estimated that the commercial
aircraft it was leasing to the airline industry would have a residual value of
five percent of the purchase price. It turned out that the aircraft were worth
150 percent of their cost—a handsome profit. At the same time, if residual
values decline, lessors can suffer losses when less-valuable leased assets are
returned at the conclusion of the lease. At one time, automaker Ford (USA)
took a $2.1 billion write-down on its lease portfolio, when rising gas prices
spurred dramatic declines in the resale values of leased trucks and SUVs.
Such residual value losses led Chrysler (USA) to get out of the leasing
business altogether.

--- Page 1897 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Residual Value Regret
As discussed, residual value profits are an important driver for the popularity
of leasing for lessors, especially for leases of equipment and vehicles.
However, the profitability of equipment leasing hinges on the lessors’ ability
to accurately estimate the residual value of the leased asset at the end of the
lease so as to resell the asset at a profit when returned by the lessee. General
Motors (GM) (USA) has learned that residual value profits are not
guaranteed. Here is what happened.
GM took advantage of a government subsidy of $7,500 per electric vehicle to
help drive down the cost of a lease for its electric car, the Chevy Volt. The
taxpayer subsidies along with other GM incentives provided for low monthly
lease payments, given the estimated residual value, and led to a full two-thirds
of all Volt “sales” being attributed to leases. That’s about three times the lease
rate for the overall industry. The problems for GM started when the Volts
came back at the end of the lease. Unfortunately for GM and other electric car
enthusiasts, demand for electric cars without the incentives (which expired)
has not been sustained, and resale values for Volts plummeted.
The rollback of electric car subsidies has spread around the globe. In the
United Kingdom, the British car industry has blamed the government
downgrade of subsidies for the decline in sales of electrified vehicles (down
11.8 percent). Notable players in the electric car market, Tesla (USA) and
Daimler (DEU), have felt the effects.
As a result, rather than reaping residual value profits, these carmakers will
sustain losses when an electric vehicle, like the Volt, is returned but must be
sold for less than the original expected residual values. It’s a double whammy
for GM, as the already low sales numbers for new Volts will be further hurt by
the supply of low-priced Volts on the used car lot. Although it appears that
GM made a bad bet on residual value profits on the Volt, there may be
beneficiaries, as those looking for a good deal on a Volt now have a supply of
low-priced, used models from which to choose.
Sources: M. Modica, “Chevy Volt Resale Values Plunge as Lease Returns,” National Legal and
Policy Center (August 7, 2014); and J. Jolly, “Subsidy Cuts Blamed for Fall in UK Sales of Electrified
Vehicles,” The Guardian (July 4, 2019).
Lessee Accounting

--- Page 1898 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Explain the accounting for leases by lessees.
A lease is defined as a “contract, or part of a contract, that conveys the right to
control the use of identified property, plant or equipment (an identified asset) for
a period of time in exchange for consideration.” [1] (See the Authoritative
Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) A lease therefore
conveys the use of an asset from one party (the lessor) to another (the lessee)
without transferring ownership. Accounting for lease transactions is controversial,
as the following example illustrates.
If Air France (FRA) borrows $47 million on a 10-year note from Barclays
(GBR) to purchase a Boeing 737 jet plane, Air France should report an asset and
related liability at that amount on its statement of financial position. Similarly, if
Air France purchases the 737 for $47 million directly from Boeing through an
installment purchase over 10 years, it should report an asset and related liability
(i.e., it should “capitalize” the installment transaction).
However, what would happen if Air France leases the Boeing 737 for 10 years
from International Lease Finance Corp. (ILFC) (USA) (a subsidiary of the
Irish company AerCap) through a non-cancelable lease transaction with
payments of the same amount as the installment purchase transaction? In that
case, opinion differs over how to report this transaction. The various views on
capitalization of leases are summarized in Illustration 21.2. In short, the
viewpoints range from no capitalization to capitalization of all long-term leases.
The IASB now requires lessees to capitalize all leases. The only exceptions
to the capitalization requirement are for leases covering a term of less than one
year or for a lease of property with a value less than $5,000. The IASB indicates
that the right to use property under the terms of the lease is an asset, and the
lessee’s obligation to make payments under the lease is a liability. As a result, Air
France records the right-of-use of the airplane as an asset on its statement of
financial position. It also records a liability for its obligation to make payments
under the lease.1

--- Page 1899 ---
1. Do not capitalize any leased assets. This view considers capitalization
inappropriate because Air France does not own the property. Furthermore, a
lease is an “executory” contract requiring continuing performance by
both parties. Because companies do not currently capitalize other executory
contracts (such as purchase commitments and employment contracts), they
should not capitalize leases either.
2. Capitalize leases that are similar to installment purchases. This view
holds that companies should report transactions in accordance with their
economic substance. Therefore, if companies capitalize installment
purchases, they should also capitalize leases that have similar
characteristics. For example, Air France makes the same payments over a 10-
year period for either a lease or an installment purchase. Lessees make
rental payments, whereas owners make mortgage payments.
3. Capitalize all long-term leases. This approach requires only the long-
term right to use the property in order to capitalize. This property-rights
approach capitalizes all long-term leases.
4. Capitalize firm leases where the penalty for non-performance is
substantial. A final approach advocates capitalizing only “firm” (non-
cancelable) contractual rights and obligations. “Firm” means that it is
unlikely to avoid performance under the lease without a severe penalty.
ILLUSTRATION 21.2 Views on Lease Capitalization
Once the lease is recorded, the lessee (e.g., Air France) recognizes interest expense
on the lease liability over the life of the lease using the effective-interest method
and records depreciation expense on the right-of-use asset. This accounting,
referred to as the finance lease method, is applied whether the lease
arrangement is effectively a purchase of the underlying asset (Air France’s lease
with ILFC above) or when the lessee obtains control of only the use of the
underlying asset but not the underlying asset itself. For example, a lease may
convey use of one floor of an office building for five years. At the end of the lease,
the lessee vacates the floor and the lessor can then lease the floor to another
tenant. In this situation, the lease conveys right-of-use but not ownership.
However, lessee accounting for leases that transfer ownership or transfer control
is the same.2
Measurement of the Lease Liability and Lease Asset
As indicated, at commencement of the lease, lessees record a right-of-use asset
and lease liability. The lease liability is computed as the present value of the lease
payments. The asset representing the right-of-use of the underlying asset (i.e., the

--- Page 1900 ---
right-of-use asset) is equal to the lease liability.3 Measurement of the lease
liability is based on the lease term, lease payments, and discount rate.
Lease Term
The lease term is generally considered to be the fixed, non-cancelable term of the
lease. Some leases include a bargain renewal option, which gives the lessee an
option to renew the lease for a rental that is lower than the expected fair rental at
the time the option becomes exercisable. The lease term should include the
bargain renewal periods if, at the commencement of the lease, the difference
between the renewal rental and the expected fair rental is great enough to make
exercise of the option to renew reasonably certain.4
For example, assume that Carrefour (FRA) leases PCs from Lenovo (CHN) for
two years at a rental of $100 per month per computer. In addition, Carrefour can
lease these computers for $10 per month per computer for another two years. The
lease clearly offers a bargain renewal option, and Carrefour should consider the
lease term for these computers to be four years, not two.
Lease Payments
The lease payments generally include the following:
1. Fixed payments. These are the rental payments that are specified in the
lease agreement and fixed over the lease term.
2. Variable payments that are based on an index or a rate. The lessee
should include variable lease payments in the value of the lease liability at the
level of the index/rate at the commencement date. When valuing the lease
liability, no increases or decreases to future lease payments should be
assumed based on increases or decreases in the index or rate. Instead, any
difference in the payments due to changes in the index or rate is expensed in
the period incurred. Illustrations 21.3 and 21.4 provide an analysis of
variable lease payments.

--- Page 1901 ---
Including Variable Lease Payments
Facts: On January 1, 2022, Jose Shipping leases an airplane for 6 years. The
annual lease payments are R$1,000,000 per year, payable at the beginning of
each year (annuity-due basis). In addition, the lease agreement specifies that the
lease payment increases by R$30,000 every year.
Question: What are the lease payments in 2023?
Solution: On January 1, 2023, the lease payment is R$1,030,000 (R$1,000,000
+ R$30,000), which is considered a variable payment. Given that the amount
of the variable payment is known from year to year (the rate is set at
commencement of the lease and in substance fixed), such variable payments
are included in calculating the present value of the lease liability.
ILLUSTRATION 21.3 Variable Lease Payments
Expensing Variable Lease Payments
Facts: Assume the same information as in Illustration 21.3, except that the lease
payments are adjusted each year by a change in a price index.
Question: If the price index is 100 at January 1, 2022, and increases to
104 on January 1, 2023, what is the payment on January 1, 2023?
Solution: The variable payment on January 1, 2023, is R$1,040,000
(R$1,000,000 × 1.04). Because the amount of the variable payment from year
to year is not known at the lease commencement date, this payment is not
included in determining the present value of the lease liability. This additional
payment (R$40,000) is recognized as an expense in the period it is incurred.
Similarly, when lease payments vary with a performance measure (e.g., sales at
a store location, asset usage), the variable amounts will be expensed in the
period incurred.
ILLUSTRATION 21.4 Variable Lease Payments
3. Amounts guaranteed by a lessee under a residual value guarantee.
Residual value is the expected value of the leased asset at the end of the
lease term. A residual value can be guaranteed or unguaranteed. In a

--- Page 1902 ---
guaranteed residual value, the lessee has an obligation not only to return
the leased asset at the end of the lease term but also to guarantee that the
residual value will be a certain amount. If the lease involves an
unguaranteed residual value, the lessee does not have any obligation to
the lessor at the end of the lease, except to return the leased asset to the
lessor. As a result, an unguaranteed residual value is not included in the lease
payments. [5]
A guaranteed residual value is included in the lease payments, only to the
extent that the guaranteed amount exceeds the expected residual value of the
underlying asset at the end of the lease. That is, for measurement of the lease
liability, the lessee includes only the expected residual value probable
of being owed by the lessee under the residual value guarantee.
4. Payments related to purchase or termination options that the lessee
is reasonably certain to exercise. If the lease contains a bargain purchase
option that is reasonably certain to be exercised, the cost of that option
should be considered part of the lease payments. Analysis of a termination
option is indicated in Illustration 21.5.
Analyzing a Termination Option
Facts: Cabrera Company leases a building and land from Worldwide Leasing for
6 years with monthly payments of $10,000. The lease contract allows Cabrera to
terminate the lease after 2 years for a total payment of $140,000. At the
commencement of the lease, it is reasonably certain that Cabrera will not
continue the lease beyond 2 years.
Question: What are Cabrera’s lease payments?
Solution: In this case, Cabrera should include the cost of the termination
option in its calculation of the present value of its lease liability. The total lease
payments are therefore $380,000 [($10,000 × 24) + $140,000].
ILLUSTRATION 21.5 Termination Option
Discount Rate
To determine the lease liability, a lessee (i.e, the Air France example discussed
earlier) should compute the present value of the lease payments using the
implicit interest rate. [6] This rate is defined as the discount rate that, at
commencement of the lease, causes the aggregate present value of the lease

--- Page 1903 ---
payments and unguaranteed residual value to be equal to the fair value of the
leased asset. [7]
Air France may find that it is impracticable to determine the implicit rate of the
lessor. In the event that it is impracticable to determine the implicit rate, Air
France uses its incremental borrowing rate. The incremental borrowing rate
is the rate of interest the lessee would have to pay on a similar lease, or the rate
that, at commencement of the lease, the lessee would incur to borrow over a
similar term the funds necessary to purchase the asset. The implicit rate of the
lessor is generally a more realistic rate to use in determining the amount to report
as the asset and related liability for Air France. However, given the difficulty the
lessee may have in determining the implicit rate, it is likely that the lessee will use
the incremental borrowing rate.5
Subsequent Lessee Accounting
Throughout the term of the lease, a lessee like Air France uses the effective-
interest method to allocate each lease payment between principal and interest
on the lease liability. This method produces a periodic interest expense equal to a
constant percentage of the carrying value of the lease obligation. When applying
the effective-interest method, a lessee such as Air France should use the implicit
rate (if known) or its incremental borrowing rate. Depreciation of the right-of-use
asset is accounted for similarly to other non-financial assets. That is, the lessee
should depreciate the right-of-use asset using an approach that reflects the
consumption of the economic benefits of the leased asset. Generally, companies
use the straight-line method for recording the consumption of a right-of-use asset.
If the lease agreement transfers ownership of the asset to Air France at the end of
the lease, it depreciates the aircraft consistent with its normal depreciation policy
for other aircraft, using the economic life of the asset. On the other hand, if
the lease does not transfer ownership, then Air France depreciates it over the
term of the lease.6 In this case, the aircraft reverts to ILFC after a certain period
of time. Recognizing the interest on the lease liability coupled with the
depreciation of the right-of-use asset will generally result in higher total
expense in the earlier years and lower total expense in the later years of
the lease.
Lessee Accounting: Example 1
To illustrate the accounting for a lease using the finance lease method, assume
that CNH Capital (NLD) (a subsidiary of CNH Global) and Ivanhoe Mines
Ltd. (CAN) sign a lease agreement dated January 1, 2022, that calls for CNH to
lease a backhoe to Ivanhoe beginning January 1, 2022. The terms and provisions
of the lease agreement and other pertinent data are as follows.

--- Page 1904 ---
The term of the lease is five years. The lease agreement is non-cancelable,
requiring equal rental payments of €20,711.11 at the beginning of each year
(annuity-due basis).
The backhoe has a fair value at the commencement of the lease of €100,000,
an estimated economic life of five years, and a guaranteed residual value of
€5,000. (Ivanhoe expects that it is probable that the expected residual value
at the end of the lease will be greater than the guaranteed amount of €5,000.)
The lease contains no renewal options. The backhoe reverts to CNH Capital at
the termination of the lease.
Ivanhoe’s incremental borrowing rate is 5 percent per year.
Ivanhoe depreciates its equipment on a straight-line basis.
CNH sets the annual rental rate to earn a rate of return of 4 percent per year;
Ivanhoe is aware of this rate.
Ivanhoe computes the lease liability and the amount capitalized as a right-of-use
asset as the present value of the lease payments, as shown in Illustration 21.6.7
Capitalized
amount
= €20,711.11 × Present value of an annuity due of 1 for 5
periods at 4%
= €20,711.11 × 4.62990 (PVF-AD5,4%)
= €95,890.35*
*Rounded by €0.02.
ILLUSTRATION 21.6 Present Value of Lease Payments
Note that the present value measurement does not include the residual value
guarantee. That is, Ivanhoe includes only the expected residual value probable of
being owed under the residual value guarantee. Because Ivanhoe believes that
it is probable that the expected residual value will be greater than the guaranteed
residual value, the guaranteed residual value is not included in the measurement
of the lease liability.8
Ivanhoe uses CNH’s implicit interest rate of 4 percent instead of its incremental
borrowing rate of 5 percent because the implicit rate is known to Ivanhoe.9
Ivanhoe records the lease on its books as follows.
January 1, 2022
Right-of-Use Asset 95,890.35
Lease Liability
95,890.35

--- Page 1905 ---
Note that Ivanhoe records the obligation at the net amount of €95,890.35 (the
present value of the lease payments) rather than at the gross amount of
€103,555.55 (€20,711.11 × 5).10 Ivanhoe then records the first lease payment as
follows.
January 1, 2022
Lease Liability 20,711.11
Cash
20,711.11
The annual interest expense, applying the effective-interest method, is a function
of the outstanding liability as shown in the lease amortization schedule in
Illustration 21.7.
Ivanhoe Mines
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual
Lease 
Payment
Interest (4%) on 
Liability
Reduction
of Lease
Liability
Lease 
Liability
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
€95,890.35
1/1/22
€
20,711.11
€
–0–
€ 20,711.11
75,179.24
1/1/23
20,711.11
3,007.17
17,703.94
57,475.30
1/1/24
20,711.11
2,299.01
18,412.10
39,063.20
1/1/25
20,711.11
1,562.53
19,148.58
19,914.62
1/1/26
20,711.11
796.49*
19,914.62
0.00
€103,555.55
€7,665.20
€95,890.35
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Four percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by €0.09.
ILLUSTRATION 21.7 Lease Amortization Schedule—Lessee

--- Page 1906 ---
Each lease payment of €20,711.11 consists of two elements: (1) a reduction of the
lease liability and (2) a financing cost (interest expense).11 The total financing cost
(interest expense) over the term of the lease is €7,665.20. This amount is the
difference between the present value of the lease payments (€95,890.35) and the
actual cash disbursed (€103,555.55). Ivanhoe records interest expense for the
first year of the lease as follows.
December 31, 2022
Interest Expense 3,007.17
Lease Liability
3,007.17
Depreciation of the right-of-use asset over the five-year lease term, applying
Ivanhoe’s normal depreciation policy (straight-line method), results in the
following entry at December 31, 2022.
December 31, 2022
Depreciation Expense
19,178.07
Right-of-Use Asset (€95,890.35 ÷ 5 years)
19,178.07
At December 31, 2022, Ivanhoe reports right-of-use assets and related lease
liabilities separately from other assets and liabilities on its statement of financial
position, or discloses these assets and liabilities in the notes to its financial
statements.
Ivanhoe classifies the portion of the liability due within one year or the operating
cycle, whichever is longer, with current liabilities, and the rest with non-current
liabilities. For example, the current portion of the December 31, 2022, total
obligation of €75,179.24 in Ivanhoe’s amortization schedule is the amount payable
in 2023, or €20,711.11. Note that this current portion is composed of two
components: (1) accrued interest on the liability outstanding throughout the year
(€3,007.17) and (2) reduction of the initial lease liability (€17,703.94).
Illustration 21.8 shows the presentation of the lease assets and liabilities
sections as they relate to lease transactions at December 31, 2022, assuming
Ivanhoe chose to present right-of-use assets and lease liabilities separately from
other assets and liabilities on the statement of financial position.

--- Page 1907 ---
Non-current assets
Right-of-use assets (€95,890.35 − €19,178.07) €76,712.28
Current liabilities
Lease liability (€3,007.17 + €17,703.94)
€20,711.11
Non-current liabilities
Lease liability
57,475.30
ILLUSTRATION 21.8 Statement of Financial Position Presentation
On its December 31, 2022, income statement, Ivanhoe reports interest expense on
the liability and depreciation expense related to right-of-use assets, as shown in
Illustration 21.9.
Expenses
Interest expense (lease liabilities)
€ 3,007.17
Depreciation expense (right-of-use assets)
19,178.07
ILLUSTRATION 21.9 Income Statement Presentation
Ivanhoe records the second lease payment as follows.
January 1, 2023
Lease Liability (€3,007.17 + €17,703.94) 20,711.11
Cash
20,711.11
Entries through 2026 follow the pattern above. Upon expiration of the lease,
Ivanhoe has fully depreciated the amount capitalized as a right-of-use asset. It
also has fully discharged its lease obligation. At the date the lease expires, both the
right-of-use asset account and lease liability account related to Ivanhoe’s lease of
the backhoe have zero balances. If Ivanhoe does not purchase the backhoe, it
returns the equipment to CNH.12
If Ivanhoe purchases the equipment from CNH at the termination of the lease at a
price of €5,000 and the estimated remaining life of the equipment is two years, it
makes the following entry.
January 1, 2027
Equipment 5,000
Cash
5,000
Lessee Accounting: Example 2

--- Page 1908 ---
In the CNH/Ivanhoe lease just discussed, the residual value was guaranteed by
the lessee. This guaranteed residual value did not affect the computation of the
lease liability, however, because it was probable that the expected residual value
was greater than the guaranteed residual value. If the expected residual value is
greater than the guaranteed residual value, then Ivanhoe simply returns the
equipment to CNH. However, if the expected residual value is less than the
guaranteed residual value, Ivanhoe must record a loss on the lease to cover this
deficiency.
To illustrate a situation where the expected residual value is below the guaranteed
residual value, assume in the earlier CNH/Ivanhoe example that it is probable
that the residual value will be €3,000 instead of the guaranteed amount of
€5,000. If Ivanhoe estimates the residual value of the backhoe at the end of the
lease to be €3,000, Ivanhoe includes €2,000 (€5,000 − €3,000) as an additional
lease payment in determining the lease liability and right-of-use asset.
Illustration 21.10 shows the computation of the lease liability/right-of-use
asset for Ivanhoe in this situation.
Ivanhoe’s Capitalized Amount (4% Rate)
Annuity-Due Basis, Including Guaranteed Residual Value
Present value of five annual rental payments (€20,711.11 × 4.62990
(PVF-AD5,4%))
€95,890.35*
Present value of probable residual value payment of €2,000 due 5
years after date of commencement (€2,000 × .82193 (PVF5,4%))
1,643.86
Lessee’s lease liability/right-of-use asset
€ 97,534.21
*Rounded by €0.02.
ILLUSTRATION 21.10 Computation of Lessee’s Capitalized Amount—
Guaranteed Residual Value
Ivanhoe makes the following entries to record the lease and the first payment.
January 1, 2022
Right-of-Use Asset 97,534.21
Lease Liability
97,534.21
Lease Liability
20,711.11
Cash
20,711.11
Ivanhoe prepares a lease amortization schedule to show interest expense and
related amortization of the lease liability over the five-year period. The schedule,
shown in Illustration 21.11, is based on an expected residual value payment of
€2,000 (€5,000 − €3,000) at the end of five years.

--- Page 1909 ---
Ivanhoe Mines
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual
Lease
Payment
Interest (4%)
on Liability
Reduction 
of Lease 
Liability
Lease 
Liability
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
€97,534.21
1/1/22
€ 20,711.11
€
-0-
€20,711.11
76,823.10
1/1/23
20,711.11
3,072.92
17,638.19
59,184.91
1/1/24
20,711.11
2,367.40
18,343.71
40,841.20
1/1/25
20,711.11
1,633.65
19,077.46
21,763.74
1/1/26
20,711.11
870.55
19,840.56
1,923.18
1/1/27
2,000.00
76.82*
1,923.18
0.00
€105,555.55
€8,021.34
€97,534.21
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Four percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by €0.11.
ILLUSTRATION 21.11 Lease Amortization Schedule—Lessee
Illustration 21.12 shows, in comparative form, Ivanhoe’s entries for the first
two years of the lease when:
1. Ivanhoe expects to pay €2,000 at the end of the lease related to the
guaranteed residual value (see Illustration 21.11).
2. Ivanhoe does not expect to owe an additional payment for the guaranteed
residual value (see Illustration 21.7).

--- Page 1910 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21.12 Journal Entries—Guaranteed Residual Value
Following similar entries in subsequent years of the lease and using the amounts
in Illustration 21.11, at the end of the lease term (January 1, 2027), Ivanhoe
returns the asset to CNH and makes the entries shown in Illustration 21.13
under the two situations.
ILLUSTRATION 
21.13 
Final 
Payments—Guaranteed 
and
Unguaranteed Residual Value
Following the entries summarized in Illustrations 21.12 and 21.13, the Right-of-
Use Asset and the Lease Liability accounts have been fully amortized and have
zero balances. If at the end of the lease (January 1, 2027) Ivanhoe has no
additional obligations under the residual value guarantee, no further entries are
needed.
Residual Value Loss
What if the fair value of the underlying asset is less than the expected residual
value, such that Ivanhoe will have to further compensate CNH under the residual
value guarantee? In this situation, Ivanhoe will record a loss. For example,
assume that due to poor maintenance of the backhoe, Ivanhoe and CNH agree
that the fair value of the asset is zero upon returning the backhoe to CNH on

--- Page 1911 ---
January 1, 2027. In this case, Ivanhoe reports a loss of €3,000. Under the expected
payment scenario, Ivanhoe makes the following entry.
January 1, 2027
Loss on Lease (€5,000 − €2,000) 3,000
Cash
3,000
Under the no expected payment scenario, Ivanhoe makes the following entry.
Loss on Lease (€5,000 − €0) 5,000
Cash
5,000
Bargain Purchase Option
As stated earlier, a bargain purchase option allows the lessee to purchase the
leased property for a future price that is substantially lower than the asset’s
expected future fair value. That is, the price is so favorable at the lease’s
commencement that the future exercise of the option appears to be reasonably
certain. If a bargain purchase option exists, the lessee must increase the present
value of the lease payments by the present value of the option price. For example,
assume that Ivanhoe Mines (see Illustration 21.11) had an option to buy the
leased equipment for €2,000 at the end of the five-year lease term. At that point,
Ivanhoe and CNH expect the fair value to be €10,000. The significant difference
between the option price and the fair value creates a bargain purchase option, as
the exercise of that option is reasonably certain.
A bargain purchase option affects the accounting for leases in the same way as a
guaranteed residual value with a probable amount to be owed. In other words,
with a guaranteed residual value, the lessee is expected to make an additional
payment related to the residual value at the end of the lease. Similarly, the cost of
a bargain purchase option is expected to be paid by the lessee. Therefore, the
computations, amortization schedule, and entries prepared for this €2,000
bargain purchase option are identical to those shown for the €2,000 probable
amount to be owed under the guaranteed residual value (see Illustrations 21.11,
21.12, and 21.13).
The only difference between the accounting treatment for a bargain purchase
option and a guaranteed residual value of identical amounts and circumstances is
in the computation of the annual depreciation. In the case of a guaranteed
residual value, Ivanhoe depreciates the right-of-use asset over the lease term. In
the case of a bargain purchase option, it uses the economic life of the
underlying asset, given that the lessee takes ownership of the asset.
Lessee Accounting: Example 3

--- Page 1912 ---
The first two lessee examples illustrate leases with guaranteed residual values. To
illustrate lessee accounting with an unguaranteed residual value, assume that
Hathaway Disposal (lessor) and Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR) (the
lessee) sign a lease agreement dated January 1, 2022. The lease agreement
specifies that Hathaway will grant right-of-use of one of its standard cardboard
compactors for use at one of M&S’s stores. Information relevant to the lease is as
follows.
The term of the lease is three years. The lease agreement is non-cancelable,
requiring equal rental payments of £17,620.08 at the beginning of each year
of the lease (annuity-due basis).
The compactor has a cost and fair value at commencement of the lease of
£60,000, an estimated economic life of seven years, and an expected residual
value of £12,000, which is unguaranteed.
The lease contains no renewal options, and the compactor reverts to
Hathaway at the termination of the lease.
The implicit rate of the lessor is not known by M&S. M&S’s incremental
borrowing rate is six percent.
Under this lease arrangement, M&S has right of use of the compactor for three
years and will return the asset to Hathaway at the end of the lease; Hathaway
retains ownership of the compactor. The present value of the lease payments for
M&S in this situation is £49,924.56 (£17,620.08 × 2.83339 (PVF-AD3,6%)). Note
that the lease liability of £49,924.56 does not include any payments related to the
unguaranteed residual value. M&S makes the following entries to record the lease
and the first payment.
January 1, 2022
Right-of-Use Asset 49,924.56
Lease Liability
49,924.56
Lease Liability
17,620.08
Cash
17,620.08
M&S prepares a lease amortization schedule to show interest expense and related
amortization of the lease liability over the three-year period, as shown in
Illustration 21.14.

--- Page 1913 ---
Marks and Spencer plc
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Lease
Payment
Interest (6%)
on Liability
Reduction of 
Lease Liability
Lease 
Liability
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
£49,924.56
1/1/22
£17,620.08
£
–0–
£17,620.08
32,304.48
1/1/23
17,620.08
1,938.27
15,681.81
16,622.67
1/1/24
17,620.08
997.41*
16,622.67
0.00
£52,860.24
£2,935.68
£49,924.56
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Six percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is an
annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by £0.05.
ILLUSTRATION 21.14 Lease Amortization Schedule—Lessee
The journal entries to be prepared by M&S throughout the lease to record lease
expense and amortization of the lease liability and depreciation of the right-of-use
asset are as shown in Illustration 21.15, using the amounts presented in
Illustration 21.14.

--- Page 1914 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21.15 Journal Entries by Lessee
Following these entries, as indicated in Illustration 21.14, the lease liability and
the right-of-use asset have zero balances. M&S returns the asset to Hathaway.
Low-Value and Short-Term Leases
As indicated, the IASB provided an exception to the required capitalization of all
leases for (1) leases of underlying assets with low value and (2) short-term leases
with a term of 12 months or less. [8]
Low-Value Leases
For low-value leases (of underlying assets with values of $5,000 or less), rather
than recording a right-of-use asset and lease liability, a lessee may elect to
expense the lease payments as incurred. This election can be made on a lease-by-
lease basis, and if chosen, the lessee assesses the value of an underlying asset
based on the value of the asset when it is new, regardless of the age of the asset
being leased. Examples of low-value assets include desktop and laptop computers,
small items of office furniture, telephones, and other low-value equipment.
Short-Term Leases

--- Page 1915 ---
A short-term lease is a lease that, at the commencement date, has a lease
term of 12 months or less. Rather than recording a right-of-use asset and lease
liability, lessees may elect to expense the lease payments as incurred. Leases may
include options to either extend the term of the lease (a renewal option) or to
terminate the lease prior to the contractually defined lease expiration date (a
termination option). In these situations, renewal or termination options that are
reasonably certain of exercise by the lessee are included in the lease term.
Therefore, a one-year lease with a renewal option that the lessee is reasonably
certain to exercise is not a short-term lease. Illustration 21.16 provides an
example of two short-term lease situations.13
Short-Term Leases
Facts: (a) Thomas Company (lessee) enters into an arrangement to lease a crane
for a 6-month period, with the option to extend the term for up to 9 additional
months (in 3-month increments). After considering the nature of the project,
Thomas determines that it expects to use the crane for only 9 months and is
therefore reasonably certain that it will exercise only one of the 3-month renewal
options.
(b) Thomas Company enters into the same arrangement as in part (a), but the
project for which the crane is being used is now expected to take 15 months to
complete. After considering the nature of the project, Thomas determines that it
expects to use the crane for 15 months and is therefore reasonably certain that it
will exercise all three renewal options.
Question: How would Thomas report these two situations?
Solution:
(a) Since the lease term is not more than 12 months, Thomas is able to elect
the short-term lease exception, as it does not expect to exercise the renewal
option.
(b) The expected lease term is greater than 12 months because Thomas expects
to exercise all three renewal options. Thus, Thomas is not able to apply the
short-term lease exception and must record a right-of-use asset and related
lease liability.
ILLUSTRATION 21.16 Short-Term Lease Examples
Summary of Lessee Accounting

--- Page 1916 ---
As shown in three finance lease examples, lessees capitalize all leases. The only
exceptions to the capitalization requirement are for leases covering a term of less
than one year, and leases of property with a value less than $5,000. Once the lease
is recorded, the lessee recognizes interest expense on the lease liability over the
life of the lease using the effective-interest method and records depreciation
expense on the right-of-use asset. A key source of variation relates to the
treatment of residual values.
The guidelines for residual values, as shown in three lessee examples, are as
follows. [9]
1. If it is probable that the expected residual value is equal to or greater than the
guaranteed residual value, the lessee should not include the guaranteed
residual value in the computation of the lease liability.
2. If it is probable that the expected residual value is less than the guaranteed
residual value, the present value of the difference between the expected and
guaranteed residual value should be included in computation of the lease
liability.
3. The lessee does not include the unguaranteed residual value in the
computation of the lease liability.

--- Page 1917 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Your Lease Is Killing My Income
As indicated, applying the new guidance in IFRS 16 can result in “front-
loading” of expenses, compared to the prior standard (IAS 17). IAS 17 allowed
companies to expense payments as incurred on some leases (hereafter
referred to as the operating method). The operating method leads to a
constant expense from period to period. Under the new lease standard, lease
expense is generally higher than the operating method in the earlier years of
the lease because depreciation plus interest expense exceeds the constant
expense charge under the operating method. The expense profiles from
application of IFRS 16 and prior IFRS (IAS 17) are shown in the following
chart for an individual lease (assuming lease payments are even throughout
the lease term).
The chart shows that (a) the sum of interest and depreciation on a lease
applying IFRS 16 is higher than straight-line expense for an operating lease at
the beginning of the lease term and lower at the end of the lease term, and (b)
the point at which interest plus depreciation is equal to expense under the
operating lease method expense (t1 in the chart) occurs somewhere after the
midpoint of the lease.
However, earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA)—a metric closely watched by market analysts to assess profitability
and financial leverage—is expected to increase under the new rules. This is
because, under the new rules, EBITDA does not include lease expenses
(interest, depreciation and amortization), while the prior rules included the
entire expense for operating leases in EBITDA. One analysis, based on 3,199
IFRS reporters worldwide, estimates the increases in EBITDA will range from
6 percent to 11 percent, depending on industry and geographic region.
Sources: “A Study on the Impact of Lease Capitalization: IFRS 16: The New Leases Standard,”
www.pwc.com (February 2016); Effects Analysis: IFRS 16 Leases, IASB (January 2016); and N.

--- Page 1918 ---
Trentmann, “CFOs Overhaul Performance Measures in Response to New Accounting Rules,” Wall
Street Journal (May 2, 2019).
Lessor Accounting
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting for leases by lessors.
Economics of Leasing
In our examples with CNH/Ivanhoe (Examples 1 and 2), the rental payment was
given at €20,711.11. It is important to understand that CNH (the lessor)
determines the amount of the rental payment, not the lessee. CNH determines
this payment using the rate of return—the implicit rate—needed to justify leasing
the backhoe. In establishing the implicit rate, CNH considers the credit standing
of Ivanhoe, the length of the lease, and the status of the residual value
(guaranteed versus unguaranteed).
In Examples 1 and 2, CNH determined the implicit rate to be 4 percent, the fair
value of the equipment to be €100,000, and the residual value to be €5,000. CNH
then computed the lease payment as shown in Illustration 21.17.
Fair value of leased equipment
€100,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value (€5,000 × .82193
(PVF5,4%))
4,109.65
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
€ 95,890.35
Five beginning-of-year lease payments to earn a 4% return
(€95,890.35 ÷ 4.62990 (PVF-AD5,4%))
€
20,711.11
ILLUSTRATION 21.17 Lease Payment Calculation
As indicated, when a residual value is involved (whether guaranteed or not), CNH
would not have to recover as much from the lease payments. Therefore, the
periodic lease payments would be less.
Classification of Leases by the Lessor
For accounting purposes, the lessor classifies leases as a finance lease or an
operating lease. For a lease to be a finance lease, it must be non-cancelable and
meet at least one of five tests (see Illustration 21.18). [10] To meet one of
these five tests, the lessor must transfer control of a substantial portion of the

--- Page 1919 ---
underlying asset to the lessee or provide ownership of the underlying asset to the
lessee.14
ILLUSTRATION 21.18 Lessor Classification Tests
All leases that do not meet one of the tests are classified as operating leases. In
an operating lease, the lessor conveys the right to use the underlying asset for the
term of the lease but not ownership (or control of a substantial portion) of the
underlying asset itself. Illustration 21.18 presents the lease classification tests,
which are used to determine whether a lessor should classify the lease as a
finance lease or as an operating lease.
We discuss in detail each of the five tests on the following pages.
Transfer of Ownership Test
If the lease transfers ownership of the asset to the lessee, the lessor classifies the
lease as a finance lease. This test is not controversial and is easily implemented in

--- Page 1920 ---
practice.
Purchase Option Test
As indicated earlier, a purchase option test is met if it is reasonably certain that
the lessee will exercise the option. The lease purchase option allows the lessee to
purchase the property for a price that is significantly lower than the underlying
asset’s expected fair value at the date the option becomes exercisable (a bargain
purchase option). That is, the lessor transfers control (ownership) of the asset
to the lessee.
Lease Term Test
When the lease term is a major part of the remaining economic life of the leased
asset, lessors should use the finance method in accounting for the lease
transaction. The question is, what is a major part of the economic life of a leased
asset? The IASB indicates that lessees should use judgment and offers additional
factors to consider in its application guidance for IFRS 16 to assist in these
decisions. For purposes of your homework, if the lease term is 75 percent or
greater of the economic life of the lease asset, assume that the lease meets the lease
term test, and finance lease treatment is appropriate.15
Present Value Test
If the present value of the lease payments is reasonably close to the fair value of
the asset, the lessor is effectively transferring control (ownership) of the asset to
the lessee. Again, the IASB recognizes that determining what is reasonably close
often involves significant judgment and therefore provides additional application
guidance related to this test. For purposes of your homework, if the present value
of the lease payments equals or exceeds 90 percent of the fair value of the asset,
assume that the lease meets the present value test, and finance lease treatment
is appropriate.
Lease Payments
As discussed earlier, the lease payments generally include the following: (1) Fixed
payments, which are the rental payments that are specified in the lease agreement
and fixed over the lease term; (2) Variable payments, which are based on an index
or a rate. The lessor should include variable lease payments at the level of the
index/rate at the commencement date; (3) Residual values (whether guaranteed
or not), which are included because a lessor, does not have to recover as much
from the rental payments and therefore the rental payments are less; and (4)
Payments related to purchase or termination options that the lessee is reasonably
certain to exercise. As indicated earlier, if the lease contains a bargain purchase
option, the cost of that option should be considered part of the lease payments.

--- Page 1921 ---
Discount Rate
The lessor should use the implicit rate to determine the present value of the
payments. This rate is defined as the discount rate that, at commencement of the
lease, causes the aggregate present value of the lease payments and unguaranteed
residual value to be equal to the fair value of the leased asset.
Alternative Use Test
If at the end of the lease term the lessor does not have an alternative use for the
asset, it is assumed that the lessor has transferred control (ownership) of the
asset to the lessee. Therefore, the lessor uses the finance lease method. For
example, an equipment manufacturer might build hydraulic lifts to meet unique
loading dock configurations of a lessee, like Amazon.com (USA). Given the
specialty nature of the equipment, only Amazon can use the lifts and it receives
substantially all of the benefits of the leased asset, such that the alternative use
test is met for the lessor.16
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Not So Fast
As an illustration of the importance of the control criteria, consider the case of
computer leasing companies, which at one time bought IBM (USA)
equipment, leased the equipment to their customers, and removed the leased
assets from their statements of financial position. In leasing the assets, the
computer lessors stated that they would substitute new IBM equipment if
obsolescence occurred (a sales return provision). However, when IBM
introduced a new computer line, IBM refused to sell it to the computer leasing
companies. As a result, a number of the lessors could not meet their contracts
with their customers and had to take back the old equipment. Thus, control
had not been fully transferred, and the computer leasing companies had to
reinstate the assets they had taken off the books. Such a case demonstrates
one reason why the lessor classification tests must be aligned with those for
revenue recognition.
Accounting Measurement and Presentation
Lessors account for finance leases similarly to the accounting for the sale of an
asset with a loan, by eliminating the asset and recording a Lease Receivable
equal to the present value of the lease payments. Lessors then recognize interest
revenue on the lease receivable over the life of the lease using the effective-

--- Page 1922 ---
interest method. The Lease Receivable is computed as shown in Illustration
21.19.17
Lease Receivable = Present Value of
Rental Payments +
Present Value of Guaranteed
and Unguaranteed
Residual Values
ILLUSTRATION 21.19 Lease Receivable
Under the operating method, lessors continue to recognize the asset on the
statement of financial position and record equal amounts of lease revenue
(straight-line basis) in each period. Lessors generally depreciate the leased asset
on a straight-line basis.18
Accounting for Finance Lease (Lessor)
Finance leases are often subdivided into sales-type leases and direct financing
leases. Normally, sales-type leases arise when manufacturers or dealers use
leasing as a means of marketing their products. For example, a computer
manufacturer will lease its computer equipment (possibly through a captive) to
businesses and institutions. Direct financing leases generally result from
arrangements with lessors that are primarily engaged in financing operations (e.g.,
banks and insurance companies). Sales-type leases are covered extensively in this
chapter because these type of transactions involve the recording of sales revenue,
cost of goods sold, and interest revenue. Direct financing leases generally record
only interest revenue. Both of these approaches follow the revenue recognition
guidelines in IFRS 15.
Finance (Sales-Type) Lease Example
To illustrate lessor accounting for a finance (sales-type) lease, refer to the
preceding CNH Global/Ivanhoe Mines example. We repeat here the information
relevant to CNH in accounting for this lease transaction.
The term of the lease is five years. The lease agreement is non-cancelable,
requiring equal rental payments at the beginning of each year (annuity-due
basis).
The backhoe has a fair value at the commencement of the lease of €100,000,
an estimated economic life of five years, and a guaranteed residual value of
€5,000 (which is less than the expected fair value of the backhoe at the end of
the lease). Further, assume the underlying asset (the backhoe) has an
€85,000 cost to the dealer, CNH.
The lease contains no renewal options. The backhoe reverts to CNH at the
termination of the lease.

--- Page 1923 ---
Collectibility of payments by CNH is probable.
CNH sets the annual rental payment to earn a rate of return of 4 percent per
year (implicit rate) on its investment as shown in Illustration 21.20.
Fair value of leased equipment
€100,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value (€5,000 × .82193
(PVF5,4%))
4,109.65
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
€ 95,890.35
Five beginning-of-year lease payments to earn a 4% return
(€95,890.35 ÷ 4.62990 (PVF-AD5,4%))
€
20,711.11
ILLUSTRATION 21.20 Lease Payment Calculation
CNH determines the lease payments based on the implicit rate (rate of return)
needed to justify leasing the asset. In establishing this rate of return, CNH
considers the credit standing of Ivanhoe, the term of the lease, and whether the
residual value is guaranteed or unguaranteed. In the CNH/Ivanhoe example,
when a residual value is involved (whether guaranteed or not), CNH does not have
to recover as much from the rental payments and therefore the rental payments
are less.
CNH evaluates the lease classification tests as indicated in Illustration 21.21.

--- Page 1924 ---
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to CNH
at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is equal to the economic life of the asset (100%).
Therefore, the lease meets the lease term test.
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is €100,000*, which is
100% (greater than or equal to 90%) of the fair value of the
backhoe. Therefore, the lease meets the present value test.
5. Alternative
use test
Since the asset is returned to CNH with some residual value, the
alternative use test is not met.
*Present value of
payments (€20,711.11
× 4.62990 (PVF-
AD5,4%))
€ 95,890.35
Present value of the
residual value
(€5,000 × .82193
(PVF5,4%))
4,109.65
€100,000.00
ILLUSTRATION 21.21 Lease Classification Tests—Sales-Type Lease
The lease meets the criteria for classification as a finance (sales-type) lease
because (1) the present value of the lease payments is equal to the fair value of the
asset, and (2) the lease term is equal to the economic life of the asset. That is,
Ivanhoe will consume substantially the entire underlying asset over the lease
term. CNH computes the lease receivable as shown in Illustration 21.22.

--- Page 1925 ---
Lease
receivable
= Present value of the rental payment + Present value of the
guaranteed residual value
= €95,890.35 (€20,711.11 × 4.62990 (PVF-AD5,4%)) + €4,109.65
(€5,000.00 × .82193 (PVF5,4%))
= €100,000.00
ILLUSTRATION 21.22 Lease Receivable Calculation
CNH then records the lease receivable, cost of goods sold, and sales revenue and
removes the leased asset (which prior to the lease was included in CNH’s
inventory). The journal entry to record this transaction on January 1, 2022, is as
follows.
January 1, 2022
Lease Receivable
100,000
Cost of Goods Sold
85,000
Sales Revenue
100,000
Inventory
85,000
As a result, CNH reports a gross profit of €15,000 (€100,000 − €85,000) on its
income statement. CNH then prepares a lease amortization schedule, as shown in
Illustration 21.23, applying the effective-interest method and recognizing
interest revenue as a function of the lease receivable balance.19

--- Page 1926 ---
CNH Capital
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual
Lease 
Payment
Interest (4%)
on Lease
Receivable
Reduction 
of Lease
Receivable
Lease
Receivable
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
€100,000.00
1/1/22
€
20,711.11
€
–0–
€
20,711.11
79,288.89
1/1/23
20,711.11
3,171.56
17,539.55
61,749.34
1/1/24
20,711.11
2,469.97
18,241.14
43,508.20
1/1/25
20,711.11
1,740.33
18,970.78
24,537.42
1/1/26
20,711.11
981.50
19,729.61
4,807.81
1/1/27
5,000.00
192.19*
4,807.81
0.00
€108,555.55
€8,555.55
€100,000.00
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Four percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by €0.12.
ILLUSTRATION 21.23 Lease Amortization Schedule—Lessor
On January 1, 2022, CNH records receipt of the first year’s lease payment as
follows.
January 1, 2022
Cash
20,711.11
Lease Receivable
20,711.11
On December 31, 2022, CNH recognizes the interest revenue on the lease
receivable during the first year through the following entry (see Underlying
Concepts).

--- Page 1927 ---
Underlying Concepts
Interest revenue for the lessor may differ from interest expense for the lessee
because the lease receivable amount is different than that for the lease
liability.
December 31, 2022
Lease Receivable
3,171.56
Interest Revenue
3,171.56
At December 31, 2022, CNH reports the lease receivable in its statement of
financial position among current assets and non-current assets. It classifies the
portion due within one year or the operating cycle, whichever is longer, as a
current asset, and the rest with non-current assets.
Illustration 21.24 shows CNH’s assets section as it relates to the Ivanhoe lease
transactions at December 31, 2022.
Current assets
Lease receivable (€3,171.56 + €17,539.55) €20,711.11
Non-current assets (investments)
Lease receivable
61,749.34
ILLUSTRATION 21.24 Statement of Financial Position Presentation
In its income statement for 2022, CNH presents the revenue and expense items
shown in Illustration 21.25.
Sales
Sales revenue
€100,000.00
Less: Cost of goods sold
85,000.00
Other revenue
Interest revenue
3,171.56
ILLUSTRATION 21.25 Income Statement Presentation
The following entries record receipt of the second year’s lease payment and
recognition of the interest revenue in 2023.
January 1, 2023
Cash
20,711.11
Lease Receivable
20,711.11

--- Page 1928 ---
December 31, 2023
December 31, 2023
Lease Receivable
2,469.97
Interest Revenue
2,469.97
Journal entries through 2026 follow the same pattern, except for the year 2026. In
2026, the final lease payment is made on January 1, 2026, but the asset is not
returned to CNH until January 1, 2027.
CNH makes the following entry on December 31, 2026.
December 31, 2026
Lease Receivable
192.19
Interest Revenue
192.19
As a result, interest revenue of €192.19 is recognized for the year 2026 as the
residual value accretes up to €5,000 at the end of the lease. At January 1, 2027,
when the leased asset is returned to CNH, the Lease Receivable account is reduced
to zero and the asset returned is recorded in inventory, as follows.
January 1, 2027
Inventory
5,000
Lease Receivable
5,000
Lessor Accounting for Residual Values
Lessor Perspective—Guaranteed Residual Value
In the Ivanhoe/CNH example, Ivanhoe guaranteed a residual value of €5,000. In
computing the amount to be recovered from the rental payments, the present
value of the residual value was subtracted from the fair value of the backhoe to
arrive at the amount to be recovered by the lessor. Illustration 21.26 (which is
the same as Illustration 21.17) shows this computation.
Fair value of leased equipment
€100,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value (€5,000 × .82193
(PVF5,4%))
4,109.65
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
€ 95,890.35
Five beginning-of-year lease payments to earn a 4% return
(€95,890.35 ÷ 4.62990 (PVF-AD5,4%))
€
20,711.11
ILLUSTRATION 21.26 Lease Payment Calculation

--- Page 1929 ---
The computation in Illustration 21.26 is the same whether the residual value is
guaranteed or unguaranteed.
The lease agreement between CNH and Ivanhoe is accounted for as a sales-type
lease. CNH therefore recorded sales revenue and related cost of goods sold at lease
commencement. CNH accounts for the guaranteed residual value as part of sales
revenue because the lessor receives this amount at the end of the lease either in
cash or in the residual value returned.
Lessor Perspective—Unguaranteed Residual Value
What happens if the residual value for CNH is unguaranteed? In this case, there is
less certainty that the unguaranteed residual portion of the asset has been “sold.”
Therefore, the lessor recognizes sales revenue and cost of goods sold only for the
portion of the asset for which recovery is assured. To account for this uncertainty,
both sales revenue and cost of goods sold are reduced by the present value of the
unguaranteed residual value. [12] Given that the amounts subtracted from sales
revenue and cost of goods sold are the same, the gross profit computed will still be
the same amount as when a guaranteed residual value exists.
To compare a sales-type lease with a guaranteed residual value to one with an
unguaranteed residual value, assume the same facts as in the previous
CNH/Ivanhoe lease situation. That is:
1. The sales price is €100,000.
2. The residual value is €5,000 (the present value of which is €4,109.65).
3. The leased equipment has an €85,000 cost to the dealer, CNH.
Illustration 21.27 shows the computation of the amounts relevant to a sales-
type lease, under both a guaranteed and unguaranteed residual value situation.

--- Page 1930 ---
Guaranteed Residual Value
Unguaranteed Residual
Value
Lease receivable
€100,000
[€20,711.11 × 4.62990 (PVF-
AD5,4%)
+ €5,000 × .82193 (PVF5,4%)]
Same
Sales price of the
asset
€100,000
€95,890.35
(€100,000 − €4,109.65)
Cost of goods sold
€85,000
€80,890.35
(€85,000.00 − €4,109.65)
Gross profit
€15,000 (€100,000 − €85,000)
€15,000
(€95,890.35 −
€80,890.35)
ILLUSTRATION 21.27 Computation of Lease Amounts by CNH—
Sales-Type Lease
CNH makes the entries with respect to the lease arrangement under guaranteed
and unguaranteed residual value situations, as shown in Illustration 21.28.
ILLUSTRATION 21.28 Entries for Guaranteed and Unguaranteed
Residual Values—Sales-Type Lease

--- Page 1931 ---
CNH records the same gross profit (€15,000) at the point of sale whether the
residual value is guaranteed or unguaranteed. However, the amounts recorded for
sales revenue and the cost of goods sold are different between the guaranteed and
unguaranteed situations. The reason for the difference is the uncertainty
surrounding the realization of the unguaranteed residual value. Unlike the
guaranteed residual value situation, where the lessor knows that it will receive the
full amount of the guarantee at the end of the lease, in an unguaranteed residual
value situation the lessor is not sure what it will receive at the end of the lease
regarding the residual value. That is, due to the uncertainty surrounding the
realization of the unguaranteed residual value, sales revenue and related cost of
goods sold are reduced by the present value of the residual value. This results in
sales revenue and cost of goods sold being reported at different
amounts under an unguaranteed residual value situation.
Lessor Accounting for Operating Leases
To illustrate lessor accounting for an operating lease, we use the previously
discussed lease agreement between Hathaway Disposal Ltd. and M&S for the use
of one of Hathaway’s standard cardboard compactors. Information relevant to the
lease is as follows.
The term of the lease is three years. The lease agreement is non-cancelable,
requiring three annual rental payments of £17,620.08, with the first payment
on January 1, 2022 (annuity-due basis).
The compactor has a cost and fair value at commencement of the lease of
£60,000, an estimated economic life of five years, and a residual value at the
end of the lease of £12,000 (unguaranteed).
The lease contains no renewal options. The compactor reverts to Hathaway at
the termination of the lease.
The implicit rate of the lessor is known by M&S. M&S’s incremental
borrowing rate is six percent. Hathaway sets the annual rental rate to earn a
rate of return of six percent per year (implicit rate) on its investment, as
shown in Illustration 21.29.

--- Page 1932 ---
Fair value of leased equipment
£60,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value (£12,000 × .83962
(PVF3,6%))
10,075.44
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
£49,924.56
Three beginning-of-year lease payments to earn a 6% return
(£49,924.56 ÷ 2.83339 (PVF-AD3,6%))
£17,620.08
ILLUSTRATION 21.29 Computation of Lease Payments
Hathaway classifies the lease as an operating lease because none of the finance
lease tests are met, as shown in Illustration 21.30.
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to
Hathaway at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is 60% (3 ÷ 5) of the economic life of the asset,
which is less than a major part of the life of the asset (75%).
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is £49,924.56*, which is
83.2% (£ 49,924.56 ÷ £60,000) of the fair value of the
compactor. Therefore, the lease does not meet the present value
test.
5. Alternative
use test
As indicated, the equipment is not of a specialized nature and is
expected to have use to Hathaway when returned at the end of
the lease.
*£17,620.08 × 2.83339 (PVF-AD3,6%)
ILLUSTRATION 21.30 Lease Classification Tests—Operating Lease
Under the operating method, Hathaway (the lessor) continues to recognize the
asset on its statement of financial position and recognizes lease revenue
(generally on a straight-line basis) in each period. Hathaway continues to
depreciate the leased asset (see Underlying Concepts).

--- Page 1933 ---
Underlying Concepts
Since the lessor owns the underlying asset, the lessor depreciates the
compactor over its entire useful life.
To illustrate the operating method for the Hathaway/M&S lease, Hathaway
records the lease payment on a straight-line basis on January 1, 2022, 2023, and
2024, as follows.
January 1, 2022, 2023, and 2024
Cash
17,620.08
Unearned Lease Revenue
17,620.08
On December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024, Hathaway records the recognition of the
revenue each period as follows.
Unearned Lease Revenue 17,620.08
Lease Revenue
17,620.08
Hathaway also records depreciation expense on the leased equipment (assuming
the double-declining-balance method, given a cost basis of £60,000 and a five-
year economic life), as follows.
Depreciation Expense (£60,000 × .40)
24,000.00
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
24,000.00
In addition to depreciation expense, Hathaway records other costs related to the
lease arrangement, such as insurance, maintenance, and taxes, in the period
incurred. Hathaway classifies the leased equipment and accompanying
accumulated depreciation as Leased Assets.
Special Lease Accounting Problems
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Discuss the accounting and reporting for special features of lease
arrangements.
The features of lease arrangements that cause unique accounting problems are:
1. Other lease adjustments.
2. Presentation, disclosure, and analysis.

--- Page 1934 ---
Other Lease Adjustments
Additional lease adjustments that affect the measurement of lease assets and
liabilities relate to the following:
Executory costs.
Lease prepayments and incentives.
Initial direct costs.
Executory Costs
Executory costs are normal expenses associated with owning a leased asset,
such as property insurance and property taxes. The accounting for executory costs
depends on how the lease is structured, that is, whether the lease is a gross lease
or a net lease. In a gross lease, the payments to the lessor are fixed as part of the
rental payments in the contract. In a net lease, the lessee makes variable
payments to a third party or to the lessor directly for the executory costs.
Illustration 21.31 provides examples of these two situations.

--- Page 1935 ---
Gross versus Net Leases
Facts: Ortiz SpA enters into a lease arrangement to lease a retail space in a
shopping mall from Bryant Group. The lease term is 2 years with monthly
payments of €15,000 per month. Ortiz does not have any obligation to pay any of
the property taxes or property insurance on the retail space. Ortiz estimates that
Bryant is paying approximately €1,500 per month related to these executory
costs.
Question: How should Ortiz account for the executory costs in this
situation?
Solution: Ortiz and Bryant have a gross lease arrangement in that the property
taxes and property insurance are included in the rental payments made by
Ortiz. In this arrangement, the payment for the executory costs are fixed (per
the rental agreement) and should be included in the computation of the lease
liability.
Now assume that Ortiz agrees to a lease arrangement in which it must
reimburse the lessor for the property taxes and property insurance, or pay a
relevant third party directly. In this case, Ortiz and Bryant have a net lease
arrangement because the lessee makes variable payments to a third party or to
the lessor for the executory costs. In this case, Ortiz is responsible for paying
directly the executory costs and therefore it is a variable payment which is
expensed in the period incurred (not included in the lease liability and right-of-
use assets).
ILLUSTRATION 21.31 Executory Cost Example
Note that including executory costs in the measurement of the lease liability and
related right-of-use asset may lead to inflated values on the statement of financial
position in comparison to lessees who do not capitalize these costs. Thus, the way
parties structure the payment of executory costs (i.e., variable or fixed) can have
potentially material implications with regard to the values that appear on the
statement of financial position.
In summary, executory costs included in the fixed payments required by the lessor
should be included in lease payments for purposes of measuring the lease liability.
Payments by the lessee made directly to the taxing authority or insurance provider
are considered variable payments and are expensed as incurred. [13]
Lease Prepayments and Incentives

--- Page 1936 ---
For all leases at the commencement date, the lease liability is the starting point to
determine the amount to record for the right-of-use asset. Companies adjust the
right-of-use asset for any lease prepayments, lease incentives, and initial direct
costs made prior to or at the commencement date. These adjustments determine
the amount to report as the right-of-use asset at the lease commencement date as
follows.
1. Lease prepayments made by the lessee increase the right-of-use asset.
2. Lease incentive payments made by the lessor to the lessee reduce the right-
of-use asset.
3. Initial direct costs incurred by the lessee (discussed in the next section)
increase the right-of-use asset.
Illustration 21.32 identifies the adjustments made to the lease liability balance
to determine the proper amount to report for the right-of-use asset.
Initial
Measurement
of
Lease Liability
+
Prepaid
Lease
Payments
−
Lease
Incentives
Received
+
Initial
Direct
Costs
=
Right–
of-
Use
Asset
ILLUSTRATION 21.32 Right-of-Use Asset Adjustments
Initial Direct Costs
Initial direct costs are incremental costs of a lease that would not have been
incurred had the lease not been executed. [14] Costs directly or indirectly
attributable to negotiating and arranging the lease (e.g., external legal costs to
draft or negotiate a lease or an allocation of internal legal costs) are not
considered initial direct costs. Illustration 21.33 provides examples of costs
included and excluded from initial direct costs from the lessee and lessor side.20

--- Page 1937 ---
Included
Excluded
Commissions (including payments to
employees acting as selling agents)
Legal fees resulting from the execution
of the lease
Lease document preparation costs
incurred after the execution of the
lease
Consideration paid for a guarantee of
residual value by an unrelated third
party
Employee salaries
Internal engineering costs
Legal fees for services rendered
before the execution of the
lease
Negotiating lease term and
conditions
Advertising
Depreciation
Costs related to an idle asset
ILLUSTRATION 21.33 Initial Direct Costs
Initial direct costs incurred by the lessee are included in the cost of the
right-of-use asset but are not recorded as part of the lease liability.
Illustration 21.34 provides an example of the computation of the right-of-use
asset with initial direct costs.

--- Page 1938 ---
Right-of-Use Cost Analysis
Facts: Mangan Company leases from DeMallie Ltd. solar equipment for 8 years
starting on January 1, 2022. The lease is a finance/sales-type lease. The terms of
the lease are as follows.
1. DeMallie will pay Mangan €30,000 as a cash incentive for entering the lease
by January 1, 2022.
2. DeMallie pays initial direct costs of €5,000 for legal fees related to the
execution of the lease.
3. Mangan incurred €1,500 of initial direct costs (commission paid to lease
negotiator) which are payable by January 1, 2022.
4. Mangan must pay not only the first rental payment of €10,000 on January 1,
2023, but also must prepay the last month’s rental payment on December 31,
2021.
5. The initial measurement of the liability is €400,000.
Question: What is the amount to be reported for Mangan’s right-of-use
asset at the commencement date?
Solution: The measurement of the right-of-use asset for Mangan is as follows.
Initial measurement of the lease liability
€400,000
Cash incentive received from DeMallie (lessor)
(30,000)
Initial direct costs (commission paid to lease negotiator)
1,500
Prepayments made by Mangan to DeMallie before the lease
commencement
10,000
Measurement of right-of-use asset at January 1, 2022
€381,500
Mangan therefore reports the right-of-use asset at €381,500.
DeMaille (the lessor) expenses its initial direct costs in the period incurred,
given that DeMaille reported a gross profit related to its sales-type lease.
ILLUSTRATION 21.34 Computation of Right-of-Use Asset
For lessors, initial direct costs often are more significant because they usually
solicit lessees as part of their sales activities. As a result, lessors often engage
attorneys to prepare the legal documents, as well as pay commissions incurred in
connection with the execution of a lease.

--- Page 1939 ---
Lessor accounting for initial direct costs depends on the type of lease. [15]
For operating leases, a lessor defers the initial direct costs and amortizes
them as expenses over the term of the lease.
For finance leases, the lessor expenses initial direct costs at lease
commencement (in the period in which it recognizes the profit on the sale).
An exception is when there is no selling profit or loss on the transaction. If
there is no selling profit or loss, the initial direct costs are deferred and
recognized over the lease term.
Lessors commonly also incur internal costs related to leasing activities, such as
advertising, servicing existing leases, and establishing and monitoring credit
policies, as well as the costs for supervision and administration or for expenses
such as rent and depreciation. Internal direct costs should not be included in
initial direct costs. Such costs would have been incurred regardless of whether a
lease was executed. As a result, internal direct costs are generally expensed as
incurred.
Presentation, Disclosure, and Analysis
Presentation
Illustration 21.35 is a summary of how the lessee reports the information
related to leases in the financial statements.
Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
All Leases* Right-of-use asset
Depreciation expense
Lease liability
Interest expense
*Except low-value and short-term leases.
ILLUSTRATION 21.35 Presentation in Financial Statements—Lessee
Illustration 21.36 is a summary of lessor presentation of lease information in
the financial statements.

--- Page 1940 ---
Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
FinanceLease
Lease receivable presented separate
from other assets
Interest revenue
Derecognize the leased asset
Selling profit or loss for
a sales-type lease
Operating
Lease
Continue to recognize assets subject to
operating leases as property, plant, and
equipment
Revenue generally
recognized on a
straight-line basis
Depreciation expense
on the leased asset
ILLUSTRATION 21.36 Presentation in Financial Statements—Lessor
Disclosure
Lessees and lessors must also provide additional qualitative and quantitative
disclosures to help financial statement users assess the amount, timing, and
uncertainty of future cash flows. These disclosures are intended to supplement
the amounts provided in the financial statements. Qualitative disclosures to be
provided by both lessees and lessors are summarized in Illustration 21.37. [16]
Nature of the leases, including a general description.
How variable lease payments are determined.
Existence and terms and conditions for options to extend or terminate the
lease, and for residual value guarantees.
Information about significant assumptions and judgments (e.g., discount
rates).
ILLUSTRATION 21.37 Qualitative Lease Disclosures
Illustration 21.38 presents the type of quantitative information that should be
disclosed for the lessee.

--- Page 1941 ---
Total lease cost.
Finance lease cost, segregated between the depreciation of the right-of-use
assets and interest on the lease liabilities.
Low-value and short-term lease cost.
Weighted-average remaining lease term and weighted-average discount rate.
Maturity analysis of finance lease liabilities, on an annual basis for a
minimum of each of the next five years, the sum of the undiscounted cash
flows for all years thereafter.
ILLUSTRATION 21.38 Lessee Quantitative Disclosures
Illustration 21.39 presents financial statement excerpts from the 2018 annual
report of Air France (FRA). These excerpts represent the statement and note
disclosures typical of a lessee.

--- Page 1942 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21.39 Disclosure of Leases by Lessee
Illustration 21.40 shows the type of quantitative information that should be
disclosed for the lessor.

--- Page 1943 ---
Lease-related income, including profit and loss recognized at lease
commencement for sales-type and direct financing leases, and interest
income.
Income from variable lease payments not included in the lease receivable.
The components of the net investment in sales-type and other financing
leases, including the carrying amount of the lease receivable, the
unguaranteed residual asset, and any deferred profit on direct financing
leases.
A maturity analysis for operating lease payments and a separate maturity
analysis for the lease receivable (sales-type and direct financing leases).
Management approaches for risk associated with residual value of leased
assets (e.g., buyback agreements or third-party insurance).
ILLUSTRATION 21.40 Lessor Quantitative Disclosures
Illustration 21.41 presents the lease note disclosure from the 2018 annual
report of Trinity Biotech plc (IRL). The disclosure highlights required lessor
disclosures.
ILLUSTRATION 21.41 Disclosure of Leases by Lessor

--- Page 1944 ---
Analysis
Many companies that lease are likely to see the amounts reported in their
statements of financial position grow substantially over the next few years as a
result of implementing the new standard on leasing. Estimates as to its impact on
the assets and liabilities of companies vary, but it will be in the trillions of dollars.
As shown in the opening story, airlines use lease arrangements extensively, which
results in a great deal of off-balance-sheet financing. However, airlines have not
been the only ones playing the off-balance-sheet leasing game. As indicated in
Illustration 21.1, retailers like Marks and Spencer plc and Carrefour, and
publisher RELX employ leases in their businesses. Thus, analysts must adjust
reported debt levels for the effects of non-capitalized leases. A PwC survey of
3,000 international companies indicated the impacts of leasing for several
industries as shown in Illustration 21.42.
Average
Increase
in Interest-
Bearing Debt
Companies
with over 25%
Increase
Average
Increase
in Leverage
Retail and trade
213%
71%
64%
Other services
51
35
34
Transportation and warehousing
95
38
31
Professional services
158
52
19
Accommodation
101
41
18
All companies
58%
4%
13%
ILLUSTRATION 21.42 Leasing Impacts
Some contend that “grossing up” the assets and liabilities on companies’
statements of financial position will not have any significant impact on analysis,
based on information in the financial statements. Their rationale is that equity
does not change substantially, nor will net income. In addition, it is argued that
users could have determined the obligations that lessees were incurring by
examining the notes to the financial statements.
These assertions are debatable. With the increase in the assets and liabilities as a
result of the new standard, a number of financial metrics used to measure the
profitability and solvency of companies will change, which could create challenges
when performing financial analysis. On the profitability side, return on assets will
decrease because a company’s assets will increase, but net income will often be
the same. Furthermore, analysts commonly focus on income subtotals, such as
earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization (EBITDA),
which likely will require some adjustments as companies depreciate right-of-use

--- Page 1945 ---
assets and record interest expense. On the solvency side, the debt to equity ratio
will increase, and the interest coverage ratio will decrease. In addition, recent
studies indicate that using only note disclosures to determine lease obligations
has understated their numerical impact.21
One thing is certain—the grossing up of the assets and liabilities related to lease
arrangements will have significant consequences on the organizational,
operational, and contractual side. Examples are:
1. Jurisdictions often levy taxes based on property amounts, which will now be
higher.
2. Performance metrics to evaluate management may have to change for
companies, particularly when growth rates in assets are used or returns on
assets are used to measure performance.
3. Companies may have contracts with governments for which reimbursement
is based on rent expense, which may change the compensation agreement.
4. Debt covenants may require revisions.
Given the pervasiveness and magnitude of the changes, it is not surprising that
the IASB has allowed an extended implementation window to allow companies
and users of financial statements to adapt to the new standard.

--- Page 1946 ---
Evolving Issue
Bring It On!
As discussed in the opening story, the lease accounting rules will bring a
significant amount of lease-related assets and liabilities onto lessee
statements of financial position. For example, recent estimates for the largest
100 U.S. companies put the number at over $539 billion. Most agree this is a
good result—applying the “right-of-use” model will result in reporting more
relevant and representationally faithful information about leasing
arrangements, which is a big win for investors and creditors. As the
chairperson of the IASB remarked, “. . . a financing, in the form of a loan to
purchase an asset . . . then is recorded. Call it a lease and miraculously it does
not show up in your books. In my book, if it looks like a duck, swims like a
duck, and quacks like a duck, then it probably is a duck. So is the case with
debt—leasing or otherwise.”
At the same time, as the following table demonstrates, an analysis of the new
rules and how they might impact the advantages of leasing suggests that
many of the advantages of leases will remain after implementation of the new
rules.
Reason for
Leasing
Details
Status after Proposed New Rules
Implemented
Funding
source
Additional capital
source, 100%
financing, fixed rate,
level payments, longer
terms.
Still a major benefit versus a
purchase—fixed rate, level
payments—especially for smaller
companies with limited sources of
capital.
Low-cost
capital
Low payments/rate
due to tax benefits,
residual and lessor’s
comparatively low cost
of funds.
Still a benefit versus a loan.
Tax benefits
Lessee cannot use tax
benefits and lease
versus buy shows lease
option offers lowest
after tax cost.
Still a benefit.
Manage need
for
Lessee has flexibility to
return asset.
Still a benefit.

--- Page 1947 ---
assets/residual
risk transfer
Convenience
Quick and convenient
financing process often
available at point-of-
sale.
Still a benefit.
Regulatory
Can help in meeting
capital requirements.
Still a partial benefit if the
capitalized amount is less than the
cost of the asset, as it is in many
leases due to residuals assumed
and tax benefits.
Accounting
Asset and liability off-
balance-sheet.
Still a partial benefit if the
capitalized amount is less than the
cost of the asset, as it is in many
leases due to residuals assumed
and tax benefits.
Sources: Equipment Leasing & Finance Foundation, 2016 State of the Equipment Finance Industry
Report; M. Murphy, “The Big Number: $539 Billion,” Wall Street Journal (January 16, 2016); Hans
Hoogervorst, “Harmonisation and Global Economic Consequences,” public lecture at the London
School of Economics (November 6, 2012); “Telecom Industry Update: Benefits of Financing Remain
with Lease Accounting Changes,” Knowledge, Leasing/Finance
(www.telecomreseller.com/2016/05/09/telecom-industry-update-benefits-of-financing-remain-
with-lease-accounting-changes/); and R. Petta, “The Silver Lining of Lease Accounting: What
Organizations Should Know About Leasing Standards,” www.manufacturing.net (April 3, 2019).
APPENDIX 21A
Sale-Leasebacks
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Describe the lessee’s accounting for sale-leaseback transactions.
In a sale-leaseback arrangement, a company (the seller-lessee) transfers an
asset to another company (the buyer-lessor) and then leases that asset back from
the buyer-lessor. For example, Darden Restaurants (USA) sold off its Red
Lobster division to Golden Gate Capital (USA) (a private equity firm) for $2.1
billion recently and then leased these restaurants back from Golden Gate Capital.
This transaction is shown in Illustration 21A.1.

--- Page 1948 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21A.1 Sale-Leaseback
Why do companies like Darden Restaurants engage in sale-leaseback
transactions? Some major reasons are:
1. Darden can use the cash that otherwise would be tied up in property to
expand its operations. At the same time, it continues to use the property
through the lease term.
2. Darden can structure the lease arrangement so issues such as repurchase
provisions, refinancing issues, and conventional financing costs are
minimized.
3. Darden may receive a tax advantage in that entire rental payments are tax-
deductible, whereas under a conventional financing, only interest and
depreciation can be deducted. If the lease has a significant land component
(land is not depreciable) or if the fair value of the property is much greater
than the carrying value of the property (depreciation limited to cost of
property), then the sale lease-back arrangement generally reduces tax
payments.
The advantages to Golden Gate Capital (buyer-lessor) are that it generally can
earn a higher rate of return under a sale-leaseback than under traditional
financing. In addition, during the lease term, Golden Gate is protected from a
downturn in the real estate market and may have an inflation hedge, provided the
property appreciates in value.
Sale-leasebacks are common. Financial institutions (e.g., HSBC (GBR) and
BBVA (ESP)) have used this technique for their administrative offices, retailers
(Liberty (GBR)) for their stores, and hospitals (Healthscope (AUS)) for their
facilities.

--- Page 1949 ---
Accounting Issues in Sale-Leaseback Transactions
When Darden transfers ownership of the Red Lobster restaurants to Golden Gate
Capital and then leases them back, the accounting issue is whether the transaction
is a sale or a financing. To determine whether it is a sale, revenue recognition
guidelines are used. That is, if control passes from seller to buyer, then a sale has
occurred. Conversely, if control does not pass from seller to buyer, the transaction
is recorded as a financing (often referred to as a failed sale). [17] Illustration
21A.2 highlights these two approaches.
ILLUSTRATION 21A.2 Sale-Leaseback Accounting
Sale Transaction
As indicated, if Darden (seller-lessee) gives up control of the Red Lobster
restaurants, the transaction is a sale. In a sale, gain or loss recognition is
appropriate. Darden then records the transaction as follows.
1. Increases cash and reduces the carrying value of the asset to zero (referred to
as derecognizing the asset).
2. Recognizes a gain or loss as appropriate.
3. Accounts for the leaseback in accordance with lease accounting guidance
covered in this chapter.
For example, assume that Stora Enso (FIN) sells one of its buildings having a
carrying value of €580,000 (building €800,000 less accumulated depreciation
€220,000) to Deutsche Bank (DEU) for €623,110. It then leases the building
back from Deutsche Bank for €50,000 a year, for eight of the building’s 15 years
of remaining economic life. Assume that the present value of these lease
payments is equal to €310,000, such that the lease is classified as an operating
lease by Deutsche Bank. Stora Enso makes the following entries to record the
sale-leaseback.
Cash
623,110

--- Page 1950 ---
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings 220,000
Buildings
800,000
Gain on Disposal of Plant Assets
43,110
(€623,110 − €580,000)
In addition, Stora Enso makes an entry to record the operating lease from
Deutsche Bank as follows.
Right-of-Use Asset 310,000
Lease Liability
310,000
Financing Transaction (Failed Sale)
Stora Enso does not record a sale in the above transaction if the lease from
Deutsche Bank is classified as a finance lease (see Underlying Concepts). The
reason: if any of the lease classification tests are met, Stora Enso, not Deutsche
Bank, controls the asset. If Stora Enso continues to control the building, it
should not record a sale nor recognize a gain or loss on the transaction. In
essence, Stora Enso is borrowing money from Deutsche Bank (often referred to as
a financing or a failed sale). In a financing (failed sale), Stora Enso:
Underlying Concepts
A sale-leaseback under a financing transaction is similar in substance to the
parking of inventories (discussed in Chapter 8). The ultimate economic
benefits remain under the control of the “seller-lessee,” so revenue (gain)
should not be recognized.
Does not reduce the carrying value of the building.
Continues to depreciate the building as if it was the legal owner.
Recognizes the sale proceeds from Deutsche Bank as a financial liability.
The entry to record the financing is as follows.
Cash
623,110
Notes Payable
623,110
Sale-Leaseback Example
To illustrate the accounting treatment accorded a sale-leaseback transaction over
the lease term, assume that Japan Airlines (JAL) (JPN) on January 1, 2022,
sells a used, standard-design Boeing 757 having a carrying amount on its books of

--- Page 1951 ---
$30,000,000 to CitiCapital (USA) for $33,000,000. JAL immediately leases the
aircraft back under the following conditions.
The term of the lease is seven years. The lease agreement is non-cancelable,
requiring equal rental payments of $4,881,448 at the end of each year
(ordinary annuity basis), beginning December 31, 2022.
The lease contains no renewal or purchase options. The plane reverts to
CitiCapital at the termination of the lease.
The aircraft has a fair value of $33,000,000 on January 1, 2022, and an
estimated remaining economic life of 10 years. The residual value
(unguaranteed) at the end of the lease is $13,000,000.
The annual payments assure the lessor an eight percent return (which is the
same as JAL’s incremental borrowing rate).
Applying the classification tests, the lease-back of the airplane is classified as an
operating lease because none of the sales-type lease criteria are met, as indicated
in Illustration 21A.3.

--- Page 1952 ---
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to
CitiCapital at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is 70% (7 ÷ 10) of the remaining economic life of
the asset, which is less than the major part of the life of the asset
(75%).
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is $25,414,624*, which
is 77% ($25,414,624 ÷ $33,000,000) of the fair value of the
aircraft, or less than 90%. Therefore, the lease does not meet the
present value test.
5. Alternative
use test
As indicated, the equipment is not of a specialized nature and is
expected to have use to CitiCapital when returned at the end of
the lease.
*$4,881,448 × 5.20637 (PVF-OA7,8%)
ILLUSTRATION 21A.3 Lease Classification Tests
Thus, this arrangement is accounted for as a sale, rather than a failed sale,
because the leaseback does not transfer control of the asset back to JAL; that is,
only the right-of-use for seven years is granted through the lease. Illustration
21A.4 presents the typical journal entries to record the sale-leaseback
transactions for JAL and CitiCapital for the first two years of the lease.

--- Page 1953 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21A.4 Comparative Entries for Sale-Leaseback for
Lessee and Lessor
As indicated, JAL amortizes the lease liability and depreciates the right-of-use
asset, resulting in interest and depreciation expense. CitiCapital (the buyer-lessor)
continues to recognize the asset on its statement of financial position and
recognizes equal amounts of rental revenue (straight-line basis) in each period. It
depreciates the leased asset generally on a straight-line basis.
APPENDIX 21B
Comprehensive Examples
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Apply lessee and lessor accounting to finance and operating leases.
This appendix presents a comprehensive illustration of lessee and lessor
accounting for a lease arrangement when classified as a finance/sales-type or

--- Page 1954 ---
operating lease.
Lease Terms: Scenario 1
Parker Shipping Ltd. (lessee) leases a standard hydraulic lift from Stoughton
Trailers AG (the lessor) that will be installed at one of Parker’s loading docks. The
lease, signed on January 1, 2022, specifies that Stoughton grants right-of-use of
the lift to Parker under the following terms:
The lease agreement is non-cancelable with a term of four years, requiring
equal rental payments of €11,182.24 at the beginning of each year of the lease
(annuity-due basis).
The lift has a fair value at commencement of the lease of €40,000, an
estimated economic life of four years, and no residual value. The
cost of the lift on Stoughton’s books is €30,000.
The lease contains no renewal options. The lift reverts to Stoughton at the
termination of the lease.
The implicit rate of the lessor is 8 percent and is known by Parker. Stoughton
sets the annual rental as shown in Illustration 21B.1.
Fair value of leased equipment
€40,000.00
Less—present value of the residual value
0.00
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
€40,000.00
Four beginning-of-year lease payments to earn an 8% return
(€40,000 ÷ 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%))
€ 11,182.24
ILLUSTRATION 21B.1 Lease Payment Calculation
Lease Classification
Stoughton (lessor) evaluates the lease classification tests as indicated in
Illustration 21B.2.

--- Page 1955 ---
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to
Stoughton at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no bargain purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is equal to the economic life of the asset (100%).
Therefore, the lease meets the lease term test.
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is €40,000*, which is
100% (greater than or equal to 90%) of the fair value of the
hydraulic lift. Therefore, the lease meets the present value
test.
5. Alternative
use test
As indicated, the hydraulic lift will be completely used up at the
end of the lease, and of no benefit to Stoughton.
*€11,182.24 × 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%) = €40,000.00
ILLUSTRATION 21B.2 Lease Classification Tests
Thus, the lease is classified as a finance (sales-type) lease due to meeting the lease
term and present value tests (either is sufficient).
Lessee/Lessor Accounting
The accounting for the lease liability (Parker) and lease receivable (Stoughton) is
based on the amounts reported in the amortization schedule presented in
Illustration 21B.3.22

--- Page 1956 ---
Parker Shipping/Stoughton Trailers
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual
Lease
Payment
Interest (8%) 
on Liability/
Receivable
Reduction of
Lease Liability/
Receivable
Lease 
Liability/
Receivable
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
€40,000.00
1/1/22
€11,182.24
€
–
€11,182.24
28,817.76
1/1/23
11,182.24
2,305.42
8,876.82
19,940.94
1/1/24
11,182.24
1,595.28
9,586.96
10,353.98
1/1/25
11,182.24
828.26*
10,353.98
0.00
€44,728.96
€4,728.96
€40,000.00
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Eight percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by €0.06.
ILLUSTRATION 21B.3 Lease Liability Amortization Schedule
Entries for Parker (lessee) and Stoughton (lessor) over the life of the lease are
presented in Illustration 21B.4, based on the amounts reported in the
amortization schedule in Illustration 21B.3.

--- Page 1957 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21B.4 Lessee/Lessor Entries for Finance/Sales-Type
Lease
Lease Terms: Scenario 2

--- Page 1958 ---
Now consider the following revised terms of the lease between Parker Shipping
Ltd. and Stoughton Trailers AG for the right-of-use of a hydraulic lift. The lease,
signed on January 1, 2022, specifies that Stoughton grants right-of-use of the lift
to Parker under the following terms.
The lease agreement is non-cancelable with a term of four years, requiring
equal rental payments of €9,538.39 with the first payment on January 1, 2022
(annuity-due basis).
The lift has a fair value at commencement of the lease of €40,000, an
estimated economic life of six years. The lift has a residual value at the
end of the lease of €8,000 (unguaranteed). The cost of the lift on
Stoughton’s books is €30,000.
The lease contains no renewal options. The lift reverts to Stoughton at the
termination of the lease.
The implicit rate of Stoughton (the lessor) is eight percent and is known by
Parker.
Stoughton determines the rental payments such that it earns a rate of return of
eight percent per year (implicit rate) on its investment, as shown in Illustration
21B.5.
Fair value of leased equipment
€40,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value (€8,000 × .73503 (PV4,8%))
5,880.24
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
€ 34,119.76
Four beginning-of-year lease payments to earn an 8% return
(€34,119.76 ÷ 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%))
€ 9,538.39
ILLUSTRATION 21B.5 Computation of Lease Payments
Lease Classification
Stoughton evaluates the lease classification tests as indicated in Illustration
21B.6.

--- Page 1959 ---
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to
Stoughton at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no bargain purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is 66.67% (4 ÷ 6) of the economic life of the asset,
which is less than the major part of the life of the asset (75%).
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is €34,119.76*, which is
85.3% (€34,119.76 ÷ €40,000) of the fair value of the lift.
Therefore, it does not meet the present value test.
5. Alternative
use test
The equipment is not of a specialized nature and is expected to
have use to Stoughton when returned at the end of the lease.
*€9,538.39 × 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%)
ILLUSTRATION 21B.6 Lease Classification Tests
Thus, the lease is classified as an operating lease by Stoughton (the lessor), as
none of the classification tests are met.
Lessee Accounting
Parker makes the following entry to record this lease and the first payment.
January 1, 2022
Right-of-Use Asset 34,119.76
Lease Liability
34,119.76
Lease Liability
9,538.39
Cash
9,538.39
Illustration 21B.7 shows the interest expense and amortization of the lease
liability, applying the effective-interest method.

--- Page 1960 ---
Parker Shipping Ltd.
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual Lease 
Payment
Interest (8%) 
on Liability
Reduction of 
Lease Liability
Lease 
Liability
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
€34,119.76
1/1/22
€ 9,538.39
€
-0-
€ 9,538.39
24,581.37
1/1/23
9,538.39
1,966.51
7,571.88
17,009.49
1/1/24
9,538.39
1,360.76
8,177.63
8,831.86
1/1/25
9,538.39
706.53*
8,831.86
0.00
€38,153.56
€4,033.80
€34,119.76
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Eight percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by €0.02.
ILLUSTRATION 21B.7 Lease Amortization Schedule—Lessee
The journal entries by Parker over the remaining life of the lease are presented in
Illustration 21B.8.

--- Page 1961 ---
ILLUSTRATION 21B.8 Lessee Entries for Finance Lease
After the entry for the final payment on December 31, 2025, the lease liability and
right-of-use asset are fully amortized and depreciated. The lease expense for the
four years (€38,153.56) is comprised of depreciation of the right-of-use asset of
€34,119.76, plus interest associated with the amortization of the lease liability of
€4,033.80.

--- Page 1962 ---
Lessor Accounting—Operating Lease
As shown in the evaluation of the classification tests in Illustration 21B.6,
Stoughton classifies the lease as an operating lease because none of the sales-type
lease criteria are met. Stoughton’s entries throughout the lease are presented in
Illustration 21B.9.
ILLUSTRATION 21B.9 Lessor Entries for Operating Lease
Under the operating method, Stoughton (the lessor) continues to recognize the
asset on its statement of financial position and recognizes equal amounts of lease
revenue (straight-line basis) in each period. It depreciates the leased asset
generally on a straight-line basis over the asset’s remaining economic life. In
addition to the depreciation charge, Stoughton reports lease revenue separately
from other revenues in its income statement or notes to its financial statements.
A lessor should classify the leased equipment and accompanying accumulated
depreciation separately from plant assets it owns as Equipment Leased to Others
or Investment in Leased Property.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
bargain purchase option
bargain renewal option
capitalization of leases
executory costs
*failed sale
finance lease
finance lease method

--- Page 1963 ---
guaranteed residual value
implicit interest rate
incremental borrowing rate
initial direct costs
internal costs
lease
lease classification tests
lease receivable
lease term
lessee
lessor
low-value lease
operating lease
residual value
*sale-leaseback
sales-type lease
short-term lease
unguaranteed residual value
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the environment related to leasing transactions.
A lease is a contract, or part of a contract, that conveys the right to control the use
of identified property, plant, or equipment (an identified asset) for a period of
time in exchange for consideration. The advantages of lease transactions for
lessees are: (1) 100 percent financing, (2) protection against obsolescence, (3)
flexibility, and (4) less costly financing. The benefits for lessors are: (1) profitable
interest margins, (2) stimulation of product sales, (3) tax benefits and efficient tax
sharing, and (4) residual value profits.
2 Explain the accounting for leases by lessees.
For all leases, the lessee records a right-of-use asset and related liability at the
commencement of the lease. The lease liability is computed as the present value

--- Page 1964 ---
of the lease payments. The asset representing the right-of-use of the underlying
asset (i.e., the right-of-use asset) is equal to the lease liability. The lessee
recognizes interest expense on the lease liability over the life of the lease using
the effective-interest method and records depreciation expense on the right-of-use
asset (generally on a straight-line basis).
Low-Value Leases. For leases of underlying assets with values of $5,000 or
less, rather than recording a right-of-use asset and lease liability, a lessee may
elect to expense the lease payments as incurred.
Short-Term Leases. A short-term lease is a lease that, at the commencement
date, has a lease term of 12 months or less. Rather than recording a right-of-use
asset and lease liability, lessees may elect to forego recognition of a right-of-use
asset and lease liability and expense the lease payments as incurred.
Whether the estimated residual value is guaranteed or unguaranteed is of
both economic and accounting consequence to the lessee: (1) If it is probable that
the expected residual value is equal to or greater than the guaranteed residual
value, the lessee should not include the guaranteed residual value in the
computation of the lease liability. (2) If it is probable that the expected residual
value is less than the guaranteed residual value, the present value of the
difference between the expected and guaranteed residual values should be
included in computation of the lease liability. (3) The lessee does not include the
unguaranteed residual value in the computation of the lease liability.
Bargain Purchase Option. A bargain purchase option increases the present
value of the lease payments by the present value of the option price for the lessee.
In computing annual depreciation of the right-of-use asset with this type of
option, the lessee uses the economic life of the underlying asset.
3 Explain the accounting for leases by lessors.
The lessor determines the lease payments based on the rate of return—the
implicit rate—needed to justify leasing the asset, taking into account the credit
standing of the lessee, the lease term, and the status of the residual value
(guaranteed versus unguaranteed). Lessors use one of two methods to account for
lease arrangements: (1) the finance lease method or (2) the operating lease
method. Refer to Illustration 21.18 for the tests lessors use to determine whether
to use the finance method or the operating method. Leases that fail to meet any of
the five classification tests are classified as operating leases.
For a finance lease, the lessor accounts for the lease in a manner similar to the
sale of an asset. At lease commencement, the lessor takes the asset off the books
and records a receivable equal to the present value of the lease payments. Any
dealer or manufacturer selling profit on the transfer of the leased asset (in a sales-
type lease) is recognized in income at commencement of the lease. The lessor

--- Page 1965 ---
recognizes interest revenue on the lease receivable over the life of the lease using
the effective-interest method. In an operating lease, a lessee obtains control of
only the use of the underlying asset but not ownership of the underlying asset
itself. Under the operating method, lessors continue to recognize the asset on
the statement of financial position and record equal amounts of lease revenue
(straight-line basis) in each period. The lessor depreciates the leased asset
generally on a straight-line basis.
4 Discuss the accounting and reporting for special features of lease
arrangements.
Other Lease Adjustments. The lease liability is the starting point to determine
the amount to record for the right-of-use asset. Lessees adjust the measurement
of the right-of-use asset as follows: (1) lease prepayments made by the lessee
increase the right-of-use asset, (2) lease incentive payments made by the lessor to
the lessee reduce the right-of-use asset, and (3) initial direct costs incurred by the
lessee increase the right-of-use asset.
Presentation, Disclosure, and Analysis. Presentation and disclosure by
lessors and lessees of amounts related to leases vary, depending on whether leases
are classified as finance/sales-type or operating. See Illustrations 21.37 and 21.38
(presentation in the statement of financial position and income statement) and
Illustrations 21.39, 21.40, and 21.41 (disclosures in the notes to the financial
statements) for summaries of presentation and disclosure requirements.
Expanded recognition of lease assets and liabilities under the new lease
accounting rules have the potential to result in significant impacts on analysis,
based on information in the financial statements. A number of financial metrics
used to measure the profitability and solvency of companies will change, which
could create challenges when performing financial analysis.
*5 Describe the lessee’s accounting for sale-leaseback transactions.
In a sale-leaseback arrangement, a company (the seller-lessee) transfers an asset
to another company (the buyer-lessor) and then leases that asset back from the
buyer-lessor. If the leaseback is classified as a finance/sales-type lease, the sale is
not recognized (and is referred to as a failed sale) because the seller-lessee
continues to control the asset—the transaction is accounted for as a financing
arrangement. If the leaseback is classified as an operating lease, sale-leaseback
accounting is appropriate. Under sale-leaseback accounting, gross profit on the
sale is recognized and the leaseback is accounted for as a lease with recognition of
a right-of-use asset, lease liability, and subsequent amortization and depreciation
using the finance lease method. The buyer-lessor continues to recognize the asset
on its statement of financial position and recognizes equal amounts of lease

--- Page 1966 ---
revenue (straight-line basis) in each period. It depreciates the leased asset
generally on a straight-line basis.
*6 Apply lessee and lessor accounting to finance and operating
leases.
Companies must understand and correctly apply the procedures for classifying
and accounting for lease arrangements.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Morgan Bakeries is involved in four different lease situations. Each of these
leases is non-cancelable, and in no case does Morgan receive title to the
properties leased during or at the end of the lease term. All leases start on
January 1, 2022, with the first rental due at the beginning of the year. For each
lease, assume that the lessors have alternative use for the assets at the end of
the lease unless ownership transfers to the lessee. Additional information is
shown in the following table.
(a)
Harmon
AG
(b) Arden’s Oven plc
(c)
Mendota
Truck
SA
(d)
Appleland
Computer
Type of
property
Cabinets
Oven
Truck
Computer
Yearly rental
€6,000
£12,000
€5,189.31 €2,640.35
Lease term
(years)
20
10
3
3
Estimated
economic life
30
25
4
5
Purchase
option
None
£75,000 at end of 10
years £4,000 at end of 15
years
None
€3,000 at
end of 3
years, which
approximates
fair value

--- Page 1967 ---
Renewal option None
5-year renewal at
£12,000 per year after 10
years, reasonably certain
to be exercised if the
purchase option is not
None
1 year at
€1,500; no
penalty for
non-renewal;
standard
renewal
clause
Fair value at
commencement
of lease
€75,000
£120,000
€20,000
€10,000
Cost of asset to
lessor
€60,000
£100,000
€15,000
€10,000
Residual value
1. Guaranteed
–0–
–0–
€7,000
(the
amount
expected
to be
paid)
–0–
2.
Unguaranteed
€35,000
–0–
–0–
€3,000
Incremental
borrowing rate
of lessee
8%
8%
8%
8%
Present value of
rental
payments
Using
incremental
borrowing rate
of lessee
€63,621.60 £112,191.84
€20,000
€7,618.51
Using implicit
rate of lessor
Not known Not known
Not
known
Known by
lessee (6%),
€7,481.14
Estimated fair
value at end
of lease term
€35,000
£80,000 at end of 10
years
Not
available
€3,000
£60,000 at end of 15
years

--- Page 1968 ---
Instructions
For each lease arrangement, determine the correct classification of the lease
and prepare the journal entries for both the lessee and the lessor at its
commencement.
Solution
a. Analysis of the Harmon AG lease:
1. Transfer of title? No.
2. Bargain purchase option? No.
3. Economic life test: The lease term is 20 years and the estimated
economic life is 30 years. Thus, it does not meet the 75% test.
4. Present value test: No; the present value of the rental payments of
$63,621.60 is less than 90% of the fair value of the underlying asset as
shown below.
Fair value
€75,000 Rental payments
€
6,000
Rate
× .90 PV of annuity due for 20 years at
8%
× 10.60360
90% of fair
value
€67,500 PV of rental payments
€63,621.60
Harmon should account for this lease as an operating lease. Morgan and
Harmon make the following January 1, 2022, entries.
Morgan Bakeries 
(Lessee)
Harmon AG 
(Lessor)
Right-of-Use
Asset
63,621.60
Cash
6,000
Lease Liability
63,621.60
Unearned Lease
Revenue
6,000
Lease Liability
6,000.00
Cash
6,000.00
b. Analysis of the Arden’s Oven PLC lease:
1. Transfer of title? No.
2. Bargain purchase option? The £75,000 option at the end of 10 years
does not appear to be sufficiently lower than the expected fair value of
£80,000 to make it reasonably assured that it will be exercised. However,
given that the renewal option is reasonably certain to be exercised, the

--- Page 1969 ---
parties also consider the £4,000 purchase option at the end of 15 years.
Since the fair value is expected to be £60,000 at the end of 15 years, the
£4,000 option appears to be a bargain and test 2 (bargain purchase
option) is therefore met. Note that both the guaranteed and the
unguaranteed residual values are assigned zero values because the lessor
does not expect to repossess the leased asset.
3. Economic life test: Given that the renewal option exists, the lease term
is the initial lease period of 10 years plus the 5-year renewal option. Even
though the lease term is now considered to be 15 years, the lease term
test is still not met because 75% of the economic life of 25 years is 18.75
years.
4. Present value test:
Fair value
£120,000 Rental payments
€
12,000
Rate
× .90 PV of annuity due for 15 years at
8%
× 9.24424
90% of fair
value
£108,000 PV of rental payments
£110,930.88
PV of bargain purchase option: = £4,000 × (PVF15,8%) = £4,000 × .31524
= £1,260.96
PV of rental payments
£110,930.88
PV of bargain purchase option
1,260.96
PV of lease payments
£112,191.84
The present value of the lease payments is greater than 90% of the fair value.
Therefore, the lease does meet the 90% test.
Arden should account for the lease as a sales-type lease, because the lease
meets both tests 2 and 4. The following entries are made on January 1, 2022.
Morgan Bakeries 
(Lessee)
Arden’s Oven plc 
(Lessor)
Right-of-Use Asset
(oven)
112,191.84
Lease
Receivable
120,000
Lease Liability
112,191.84 Cost of Goods
Sold
100,000
Lease Liability
12,000.00
Inventory
100,000
Cash
12,000.00
Sales
Revenue
120,000
Cash
12,000

--- Page 1970 ---
Lease
Receivable
12,000
Morgan would depreciate the right-of-use asset over its economic life of 25
years, given the bargain purchase option. The Lease Receivable amount of
£120,000 recorded by Arden is different than the Lease Liability amount of
£112,191.84 recorded by Morgan. The reason for this difference is that the
implicit rate used by Arden is lower than the incremental borrowing rate of
8% used by Morgan.
c. Analysis of the Mendota Truck SA lease:
1. Transfer of title? No.
2. Bargain purchase option? No.
3. Economic life test: The lease term is 3 years and the estimated
economic life is 4 years. Thus, it does meet the 75% test (3 ÷ 4 = 75%).
4. Present value test:
Fair value
€20,000 Rental payments
€ 5,189.31
Rate
× .90 PV of annuity due for 3 years at
8%
× 2.78326
90% of fair
value
€18,000 PV of rental payments
€14,443.19*
*Adjusted for €0.01 due to
rounding.
PV of guaranteed residual value = €7,000 × (PVF3, 8%) = €7,000 × .79383 =
€5,556.81
PV of rental payments
€14,443.19
PV of guaranteed residual value
5,556.81
PV of lease payments
€20,000.00
The present value of the lease payments is greater than 90% of the fair value.
Therefore, the lease meets the 90% test.
The following entries are made on January 1, 2022.
Morgan Bakeries 
(Lessee)
Mendota Truck SA 
(Lessor)
Right-of-Use Asset
(truck)
20,000.00
Lease
Receivable
20,000
Lease Liability
20,000.00 Cost of Goods
Sold
15,000

--- Page 1971 ---
Lease Liability
5,189.31
Trucks
15,000
Cash
5,189.31
Sales
Revenue
20,000
Cash
5,189.31
Lease
Receivable
5,189.31
This is a sales-type lease for Mendota. Morgan depreciates the right-of-use
asset over 3 years.
d. Analysis of the Appleland Computer lease:
1. Transfer of title? No.
2. Bargain purchase option? No. The option to purchase at the end of 3
years at approximate fair value is clearly not a bargain.
3. Economic life test: The lease term is 3 years, and no bargain renewal
period exists, as it is simply a standard renewal clause which is not
reasonably certain to be exercised. Therefore, the 75% test is not met (3 ÷
5 = 60%).
4. Present value:
Fair value
€10,000 Rental payments
€2,640.35
Rate
× .90 PV of annuity-due factor for 3 years at
6%
× 2.83339
90% of fair
value
€ 9,000 PV of lease payments using implicit
borrowing rate
€7,481.14
The present value of the lease payments using the implicit borrowing rate is
€7,481.14. Because the present value of the lease payments is lower than 90%
of the fair value, the lease does not meet the present value test.
Thus, this is an operating lease for Appleland. The entries made for the lease
on January 1, 2022, are as follows.
Morgan Bakeries 
(Lessee)
Appleland Computer 
(Lessor)
Right-of-Use Asset
(truck)
7,481.14
Cash
2,640.35
Lease Liability
7,481.14
Unearned
Lease
Lease Liability
2,640.35
Revenue
2,640.35
Cash
2,640.35

--- Page 1972 ---
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics
Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are available for
practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the
appendices to the chapter.
Questions
1. What are the major lessor groups? What advantage does a captive leasing
subsidiary have in a leasing arrangement?
2. Bradley plc is expanding its operations and is in the process of selecting the
method of financing this program. After some investigation, the company
determines that it could (1) issue bonds and with the proceeds purchase the
needed assets, or (2) lease the assets on a long-term basis. Without knowing the
comparative costs involved, answer these questions:
a. What are the possible advantages of leasing the assets instead of owning
them?
b. How would the statement of financial position be different if Bradley leases
the assets rather than purchasing them?
3. What are the major advantages to a lessor for becoming involved in a leasing
arrangement?
4. Morgan Handley and Tricia Holbrook are discussing the new leasing standard.
Morgan believes the standard requires that the lessee use the implicit rate of the
lessor in computing the present value of its lease liability. Tricia is not sure if
Morgan is correct. Explain the discount rate that the lessee should use to compute
its lease liability.
5. Paul Singer indicated that “all leases must now be capitalized on the statement
of financial position.” Is this statement correct? Explain.
6. Describe the following terms: (a) residual value, (b) guaranteed residual value,
and (c) initial direct costs.
7. Explain the following concepts: (a) bargain purchase option and (b) bargain
renewal option.
8. What payments are included in the lease liability?
9. Wonda Stone read somewhere that a residual value guarantee is used for
computing the present value of lease payments. Is Wonda correct in her
interpretation? Explain.

--- Page 1973 ---
10. Identify the amounts included in the measurement of the right-of-use asset.
11. Harcourt Company enters into a lease agreement with Brunsell Inc. to lease
office space for a term of 72 months. Lease payments during the first year are
$5,000 per month. Each year thereafter, the lease payments increase by an
amount equivalent to the percentage increase in a price index. For example, if the
price index increases 2% in the second year, the monthly payment increases to
$5,100. In the second year, the price index increases by 3%. What are the lease
payment amounts used to record this lease in the second year?
12. Describe the accounting procedures involved in applying the finance lease
method by a lessee.
13. What is a low-value lease? Describe lessee accounting for low-value leases.
14. What is a short-term lease? Describe lessee accounting for a short-term lease.
15. Describe the effect on the lessee of a “bargain purchase option” in accounting
for a finance lease transaction.
16. Identify the lease classifications for lessors and the criteria that must be met
for each classification. What is the relevance of revenue recognition criteria for
lessor accounting for leases?
17. Explain which of the following would result in the lessor classifying the lease
as a finance lease.
a. The lease is for a major part of the economic life of the asset.
b. The lease term is 12 months or less.
c. The lease transfers ownership of the asset at the end of the lease.
18. What is the difference between a lease receivable and a net investment in the
lease?
19. Explain the accounting involved in applying the operating lease method by a
lessor.
20. Explain the difference in lessor income statement presentation for a sales-
type versus an operating lease.
21. Walker Company is a manufacturer and lessor of computer equipment. What
should be the nature of its lease arrangements with lessees if the company wishes
to account for its lease transactions as finance (sales-type) leases?
22. Metheny Group’s lease arrangements qualify as finance (sales-type) leases at
the time of entering into the transactions. How should the company recognize
sales revenue and cost of goods sold in these situations?

--- Page 1974 ---
23. Packer plc (the lessor) concludes that its lease meets one of the tests to be
classified as a sales-type lease. However, collection of lease payments is not
probable. In this case, how should Packer account for any lease payments
received?
24. The residual value is the estimated fair value of the leased property at the end
of the lease term. Of what significance is (a) an unguaranteed and (b) a
guaranteed residual value in the lessee’s accounting under the finance lease
method?
25. Of what significance is (a) an unguaranteed and (b) a guaranteed residual
value in the lessor’s accounting for a finance (sales-type) lease transaction?
26. What are “initial direct costs” and how are they accounted for by lessees and
lessors?
27. What disclosures should be made by lessees and lessors related to future lease
payments?
*28.What is the nature of a “sale-leaseback” transaction?
*29.Sanchez SA (seller-lessee) enters into a sale-leaseback to sell its company
headquarters for R$18 million to Harper Bank. The carrying value of the
headquarters at the date of sale is R$14 million. Sanchez then leases back the
headquarters in exchange for R$180,000 per year in rental payments. The
leaseback is considered an operating lease. How should Sanchez account for this
sale?
Brief Exercises
BE21.1 (LO 2) Samson AG leases a building and land. The lease term is 6 years
and the annual fixed payments are €800,000. The lease arrangement gives
Samson the right to purchase the building and land for €11,000,000 at the end of
the lease. Based on an economic analysis of the lease at the commencement date,
Samson is reasonably certain that the fair value of the leased assets at the end of
lease term will be much higher than €11,000,000. What are the total lease
payments in this lease arrangement?
BE21.2 (LO 2, 4) Fieger Company leases equipment for 8 years with an annual
rental of $2,000 per year or $16,000 in total. General Leasing (the lessor) agrees
to provide Fieger with $300 for the first 2 years of the lease to defray needed
repairs to the equipment. Determine the undiscounted lease payments that Fieger
will pay for the first 3 years of the lease agreement.
BE21.3 (LO 2) Sanders Fashion enters into a lease arrangement with Highpoint
Leasing for 5 years. Sanders agrees to pay 4% of its net sales as a variable lease
payment. Sanders does not pay any fixed payments. Sanders is a highly successful
company that has achieved over £1,000,000 in net sales over the last 7 years. Both

--- Page 1975 ---
Sanders and Highpoint forecast that net sales will be a much greater amount than
£1,000,000 in subsequent years. As a result, it is highly certain that Sanders will
make payments of at least £40,000 (£1,000,000 × .04) each year. What is the
undiscounted lease payment amount Sanders should use to record its right-of-use
asset?
BE21.4 (LO 2) Waterworld Company leased equipment from Costner Company,
beginning on December 31, 2021. The lease term is 4 years and requires equal
rental payments of $41,933 at the beginning of each year of the lease, starting on
the commencement date (December 31, 2021). The equipment has a fair value at
the commencement date of the lease of $150,000, an estimated useful life of 4
years, and no estimated residual value. The appropriate interest rate is 8%.
Prepare Waterworld’s 2021 and 2022 journal entries, assuming Waterworld
depreciates similar equipment it owns on a straight-line basis.
BE21.5 (LO 2) Rick Kleckner NV recorded a right-of-use asset for €300,000 as a
result of a lease on December 31, 2021. Kleckner’s incremental borrowing rate is
8%, and the implicit rate of the lessor was not known at the commencement of the
lease. Kleckner made the first lease payment of €48,337 on December 31, 2021.
The lease requires 8 annual payments. The equipment has a useful life of 8 years
with no residual value. Prepare Kleckner’s December 31, 2022, entries.
BE21.6 (LO 2) Debbink plc leased machinery from Young Ltd. on January 1,
2022. The lease term was for 8 years, with equal annual rental payments of
£5,300 at the beginning of each year. In addition, the lease provides an option to
purchase the machinery at the end of the lease term for £2,000, which Debbink is
reasonably certain it will exercise, as it believes the fair value of the machinery
will be at least £6,000. The machinery has a useful life of 10 years and a fair value
of £36,000. The implicit rate of the lease is not known to Debbink. Debbink’s
incremental borrowing rate is 8%. Prepare Debbink’s 2022 journal entries.
BE21.7 (LO 3) Cardinal Ltd. is negotiating to lease a piece of equipment to MTBA
plc. MTBA requests that the lease be for 9 years. The equipment has a useful life
of 10 years. Cardinal wants a guarantee that the residual value of the equipment at
the end of the lease is at least £5,000. MTBA agrees to guarantee a residual value
of this amount though it expects the residual value of the equipment to be only
£2,500 at the end of the lease term. If the fair value of the equipment at lease
commencement is £70,000, what would be the amount of the annual rental
payments Cardinal demands of MTBA, assuming payments will be made at the
beginning of each year and Cardinal wishes to earn a rate of return on the lease of
8%?
BE21.8 (LO 3) Mequon Inc. wishes to lease machinery to Thiensville Company.
Thiensville wants the machinery for 4 years, although it has a useful life of 10
years. The machinery has a fair value at the commencement of the lease of
$47,000, and Mequon expects the machinery to have a residual value at the end of

--- Page 1976 ---
the lease term of $30,000. However, Thiensville does not guarantee any part of
the residual value. Thiensville does expect that the residual value will be $45,000
instead of $30,000. What would be the amount of the annual rental payments
Mequon demands of Thiensville, assuming payments will be made at the end of
each year and Mequon wishes to earn a rate of return on the lease of 6%?
BE21.9 (LO 3) Assume that IBM (USA) leased equipment that was carried at a
cost of £120,000 to Swander plc. The term of the lease is 6 years beginning
December 31, 2021, with equal rental payments of £30,044 beginning December
31, 2021. The fair value of the equipment at commencement of the lease is
£150,001. The equipment has a useful life of 6 years with no residual value. The
lease has an implicit interest rate of 8%, no bargain purchase option, and no
transfer of title. Collectibility of lease payments for IBM is probable. Prepare
IBM’s December 31, 2021, journal entries at commencement of the lease.
BE21.10 (LO 3) Use the information for IBM (USA) from BE21.9. Assume the
sales-type lease was recorded at a present value of £150,001. Prepare IBM’s
December 31, 2022, entry to record the lease transaction with Swander plc.
BE21.11 (LO 3) Geiberger AG manufactures drones. On December 31, 2021, it
leased to Althaus SA a drone that had cost €120,000 to manufacture. The lease
agreement covers the 5-year useful life of the drone and requires 5 equal annual
rentals of €40,800 payable each December 31, beginning December 31, 2021. An
interest rate of 8% is implicit in the lease agreement. Collectibility of the rentals is
probable. Prepare Geiberger’s December 31, 2021, journal entries.
BE21.12 (LO 3) Use the information for Geiberger AG from BE21.11, except
assume the collectibility of the rentals is not probable. Prepare any journal entries
for Geiberger on December 31, 2021.
BE21.13 (LO 3) Kubby NV specializes in leasing large storage units to other
businesses. Kubby entered a contract to lease a storage unit to Riskey Ltd. for 4
years when that particular storage unit had a remaining useful life of 5 years. The
fair value of the unit was €10,000 at the commencement of the lease on January
1, 2022. The present value of the 5 equal rental payments of €2,507 at the start of
each year, plus the present value of a guaranteed residual value of €1,000, equals
the fair value of €10,000, Kubby’s implicit rate of return on the lease of 6%. The
following is a correct, complete amortization schedule created by Kubby.
Date
Lease 
Payment
Interest (6%)
on Outstanding
Lease 
Receivable
Reduction 
of Lease
Receivable
Balance
of Lease 
Receivable
1/1/22
€10,000
1/1/22
€ 2,507
€ 2,507
7,493

--- Page 1977 ---
1/1/23
2,507
€ 450
2,057
5,436
1/1/24
2,507
326
2,181
3,255
1/1/25
2,507
195
2,312
943
12/31/25
1,000
57
943
0
€11,028
€1,028
€10,000
Given the above schedule, make the appropriate entries at December 31, 2025, for
Kubby to record the accrual of interest and the return of the storage unit to Kubby
(assuming the unit is returned on December 31, 2025, at the expected and
guaranteed residual value of €1,000).
BE21.14 (LO 2) Kingston plc leases equipment from Falls Ltd. on January 1,
2022. The lease agreement does not transfer ownership or contain a bargain
purchase option, and it is not a specialized asset. It covers 3 years of the
equipment’s 8-year useful life, and the present value of the lease payments is less
than 90% of the fair value of the asset leased. Prepare Kingston’s journal entries
on January 1, 2022, and December 31, 2022. Assume the annual lease payment is
£35,000 at the beginning of each year, and Kingston’s incremental borrowing rate
is 6%, which is the same as the lessor’s implicit rate.
BE21.15 (LO 3) Use the information for Kingston plc from BE21.14. Prepare all
the necessary journal entries for Falls Ltd. (the lessor) for 2022, assuming the
equipment is carried at a cost of £200,000.
BE21.16 (LO 2) Rodgers Corporation agrees on January 1, 2022, to lease
equipment from Packers, Inc. for 3 years. The lease calls for annual lease
payments of $12,000 at the beginning of each year. The lease does not transfer
ownership or contain a bargain purchase option, and it is not a specialized asset.
In addition, the economic life of the equipment is 10 years, and the present value
of the lease payments is less than 90% of the fair value of the equipment. Prepare
Rodgers’ journal entries on January 1, 2022 (commencement of the operating
lease), and on December 31, 2022. Assume the implicit rate used by the lessor is
8%, which is known to Rodgers.
BE21.17 (LO 3) Use the information for Rodgers Corporation and Packers, Inc.
from BE21.16. Assume that for Packers, Inc., the lessor, the collectibility of the
lease payments is probable, and the fair value and cost of the equipment are
$60,000. Prepare Packers’ 2022 journal entries, assuming the company uses
straight-line depreciation and no residual value.
BE21.18 (LO 2) On December 31, 2021, Escapee plc leased machinery from
Terminator Group for an agreed-upon lease term of 3 years. Escapee agreed to
make annual lease payments of £17,000, beginning on December 31, 2021. The
expected residual value of the machinery at the end of the lease term is £9,000,
though Escapee does not guarantee any residual value to Terminator. What

--- Page 1978 ---
amount will Escapee record as its lease liability on December 31, 2021, if its
incremental borrowing rate is 6% and the implicit rate of the lease is unknown?
BE21.19 (LO 2) Use the information for Escapee plc from BE21.18. Assume the
same facts, except Escapee guarantees a residual value of £9,000 at the end of the
lease term, which equals the expected residual value of the machinery. (a) Does
this change your answer from BE21.17 ? (b) Does your answer change if the
expected residual value at the end of the lease term is £5,000 and Escapee
guarantees a residual of £9,000?
BE21.20 (LO 2) Indiana Jones NV enters into a 6-year lease of equipment on
December 31, 2021, which requires 6 annual payments of €40,000 each,
beginning December 31, 2021. In addition, Indiana Jones guarantees the lessor a
residual value of €20,000 at the end of the lease. However, Indiana Jones believes
it is probable that the expected residual value at the end of the lease term will be
€10,000. The equipment has a useful life of 6 years. Prepare Indiana Jones’
December 31, 2021, journal entries, assuming the implicit rate of the lease is 6%
and this is known to Indiana Jones.
BE21.21 (LO 3) Use the information for Indiana Jones NV from BE21.20.
Assume that for Lost Ark AG, the lessor, collectibility of lease payments is
probable and the carrying amount of the equipment is €180,000. Prepare Lost
Ark’s 2021 and 2022 journal entries.
BE21.22 (LO 4) Forrest, Inc. has entered an agreement to lease an old
warehouse with a useful life of 5 years and a fair value of $20,000 from United
Corporation. The agreement stipulates the following.
Rental payments of $4,638 are to be made at the start of each year of the 5-
year lease. No residual value is expected at the end of the lease.
Forrest must reimburse United each year for any real estate taxes incurred for
the year. Last year, the cost of real estate taxes was $700, though these costs
vary from year to year.
Forrest must make a payment of $500 with the rental payment each period to
cover the insurance United has on the warehouse.
Forrest paid legal fees of $1,000 in executing the lease.
Assuming Forrest’s incremental borrowing rate is 8% and the rate implicit in the
lease is unknown, prepare the journal entry to record the initial lease liability and
right-of-use asset for Forrest.
BE21.23 (LO 4) Bucky Corporation entered into a lease agreement to lease
equipment from Badger, Inc. on January 1, 2022. The lease calls for annual lease
payments of $30,000, beginning on January 1, for each of the 3 years of the lease.
In addition, Badger will pay Bucky $5,000 as a cash incentive for entering the

--- Page 1979 ---
lease by January 1, 2022. In relation to the lease agreement, Bucky incurred the
following costs.
Salaries of employees involved in the investigation of the lease
$2,000
Lease document preparation costs incurred after execution of the lease
500
Bucky’s incremental borrowing rate is 8%. If the lease liability is $83,498, what
amount will Bucky record as the value of the right-of-use asset on January 1,
2022, at commencement of the lease?
BE21.24 (LO 4) Homestead AG entered into a lease to lease equipment from
Highlander SA on January 1, 2022. The lease calls for annual lease payments of
€10,000, beginning on December 31, for each of the 5 years of the lease. In
addition, Highlander will pay Homestead €2,000 as a cash incentive for entering
the lease by December 31. In relation to the lease agreement, Homestead incurred
the following costs.
Commissions for selling agents
€ 900
Internal engineering costs
500
Legal fees resulting from the execution of the lease 3,000
Homestead’s incremental borrowing rate is 6%. If the value of the lease liability is
€44,651, what amount will Homestead record as the value of the right-of-use asset
on January 1, 2022, at commencement of the operating lease?
BE21.25 (LO 4) Brent SA owns equipment that cost €80,000 and has a useful
life of 8 years with no residual value. On January 1, 2022, Brent leases the
equipment to Havaci ASA for 1 year for one rental payment of €15,000 on January
1. Assuming Havaci (lessee) elects to use the short-term lease exception, prepare
Havaci’s 2022 journal entries.
*BE21.26 (LO 5) On January 1, 2022, Irwin Animation sold a truck to Peete
Finance for €35,000 and immediately leased it back. The truck was carried on
Irwin’s books at €28,000. The term of the lease is 3 years, there is no bargain
purchase option, and title does not transfer to Irwin at lease-end. The lease
requires 3 equal rental payments of €8,696 at the end of each year (first payment
on January 1, 2023). The appropriate rate of interest is 6%, the truck has a useful
life of 5 years, and the residual value at the end of the lease term is expected to be
€14,000, none of which is guaranteed. Prepare Irwin’s 2022 journal entries.
*BE21.27 (LO 5) Assume the same facts as BE21.26, except the lease term is now
5 years and the 5 annual rental payments are €8,309, with no expected residual
value at the end of the lease term. Prepare Irwin’s 2022 journal entries assuming
these new facts.
Exercises

--- Page 1980 ---
E21.1 (LO 2) (Lessee Entries, No Residual Value) DU Journeys enters into
an agreement with Traveler plc to lease a car on December 31, 2021. The following
information relates to this agreement.
1. The term of the non-cancelable lease is 3 years with no renewal or bargain
purchase option. The remaining economic life of the car is 3 years, and it is
expected to have no residual value at the end of the lease term.
2. The fair value of the car was £15,000 at commencement of the lease.
3. Annual payments are made on December 31 at the end of each year of the
lease, beginning December 31, 2022. The first payment is £5,552.82, with
each payment increasing by a constant rate of 5% from the previous payment
(i.e., the second payment will be £5,830.46, and the third and final payment
will be £6,121.98).
4. DU Journeys’ incremental borrowing rate is 8%. The rate implicit in the lease
is unknown.
5. DU Journeys uses straight-line depreciation for all similar cars.
Instructions
a. Prepare DU Journeys’ journal entries for 2021, 2022, and 2023.
b. Assume that, instead of a constant rate of increase, the annual lease
payments will increase according to a price index. At its current level, the
price index stipulates that the first rental payment should be £5,820. What
would be the impact on the journal entries made by DU Journeys at
commencement of the lease, as well as for subsequent years?
E21.2 (LO 2) (Lessee Entries, Lease with Unguaranteed Residual Value)
On December 31, 2021, Burke Corporation signed a 5-year, non-cancelable lease
for a machine. The terms of the lease called for Burke to make annual payments
of $8,668 at the beginning of each year, starting December 31, 2021. The machine
has an estimated useful life of 6 years and a $5,000 unguaranteed residual value.
The machine reverts back to the lessor at the end of the lease term. Burke uses the
straight-line method of depreciation for all of its plant assets. Burke’s incremental
borrowing rate is 5%, and the lessor’s implicit rate is unknown.
Instructions
a. Compute the present value of the lease payments.
b. Prepare all necessary journal entries for Burke for this lease through
December 31, 2022.

--- Page 1981 ---
E21.3 (LO 2) (Lessee Computations and Entries, Lease with Guaranteed
Residual Value) Delaney AG leases an automobile with a fair value of €10,000
from Simon Motors, on the following terms.
1. Non-cancelable term of 50 months.
2. Rental of €200 per month (at the beginning of each month). (The present
value at 0.5% per month is €8,873.)
3. Delaney guarantees a residual value of €1,180 (the present value at 0.5% per
month is €920). Delaney expects the probable residual value to be €1,180 at
the end of the lease term.
4. Estimated economic life of the automobile is 60 months.
5. Delaney’s incremental borrowing rate is 6% a year (0.5% a month). Simon’s
implicit rate is unknown.
Instructions
a. What is the present value of the lease payments to determine the lease
liability?
b. Record the lease on Delaney’s books at the date of commencement.
c. Record the first month’s lease payment (at commencement of the lease).
d. Record the second month’s lease payment.
e. Record the first month’s depreciation on Delaney’s books (assume straight-
line).
f. Suppose that instead of €1,180, Delaney expects the residual value to be only
€500 (the guaranteed amount is still €1,180). How does the calculation of the
present value of the lease payments change from part (b)?
E21.4 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Entries, Unguaranteed Residual Value) Assume
that on December 31, 2021, Stora Enso (FIN) signs a 10-year, non-cancelable lease
agreement to lease a storage building from Sheffield Storage. The following
information pertains to this lease agreement.
1. The agreement requires equal rental payments of €71,830 beginning on
December 31, 2021.
2. The fair value of the building on December 31, 2021, is €525,176.
3. The building has an estimated economic life of 12 years, a guaranteed residual
value of €10,000, and an expected residual value of €7,000. Stora Enso
depreciates similar buildings using the straight-line method.

--- Page 1982 ---
4. The lease is non-renewable. At the termination of the lease, the building
reverts to the lessor.
5. Stora Enso’s incremental borrowing rate is 8% per year. The lessor’s implicit
rate is not known by Stora Enso.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries on the lessee’s books to reflect the signing of the
lease agreement and to record the payments and expenses related to this
lease for the years 2021, 2022, and 2023. Stora Enso’s fiscal year-end is
December 31.
b. Use the same facts as above, except that Stora Enso incurred legal fees of
€5,000 resulting from the execution of the lease, and received a lease
incentive of €1,000 from Sheffield to enter the lease. How would the initial
measurement of the lease liability and right-of-use asset be affected under
this situation?
c. Suppose that in addition to the €71,830 annual rental payments, Stora Enso is
also required to pay €5,000 annually for insurance costs on the building
directly to the lessor, Sheffield Storage. How would this executory cost affect
the initial measurement of the lease liability and right-of-use asset?
d. Return to the original facts in the problem. Now suppose that, at the end of
the lease term, Stora Enso has taken good care of the asset and Sheffield
agrees that the fair value of the asset is actually €10,000. Record the entry for
Stora Enso at the end of the lease to return the storage building to Sheffield
(assuming the accrual of interest on the lease liability has already been
made).
E21.5 (LO 3) (Computation of Rental, Journal Entries for Lessor)
Morgan Leasing Group signs an agreement on January 1, 2022, to lease
equipment to Cole plc. The following information relates to this agreement.
1. The term of the non-cancelable lease is 6 years with no renewal option. The
equipment has an estimated economic life of 6 years.
2. The cost of the asset to the lessor is £245,000. The fair value of the asset at
January 1, 2022, is £245,000.
3. The asset will revert to the lessor at the end of the lease term, at which time
the asset is expected to have a residual value of £24,335, none of which is
guaranteed.
4. The agreement requires equal annual rental payments, beginning on January
1, 2022.

--- Page 1983 ---
5. Collectibility of the lease payments by Morgan is probable.
Instructions
(Round all numbers to the nearest pound.)
a. Assuming the lessor desires an 8% rate of return on its investment, calculate
the amount of the annual rental payment required. (Round to the nearest
pound.)
b. Prepare an amortization schedule that is suitable for the lessor for the lease
term.
c. Prepare all of the journal entries for the lessor for 2022 and 2023 to record
the lease agreement, the receipt of lease payments, and the recognition of
revenue. Assume the lessor’s annual accounting period ends on December 31,
and it does not use reversing entries.
E21.6 (LO 3) (Lessor Entries, Sales-Type Lease with Option to Purchase)
Castle Leasing Company signs a lease agreement on January 1, 2022, to lease
electronic equipment to Jan Way Company. The term of the non-cancelable lease
is 2 years, and payments are required at the end of each year. The following
information relates to this agreement.
1. Jan Way has the option to purchase the equipment for $16,000 upon
termination of the lease. It is not reasonably certain that Jan Way will
exercise this option.
2. The equipment has a cost of $120,000 and fair value of $160,000 to Castle
Leasing. The useful economic life is 2 years, with a residual value of $16,000.
3. Castle Leasing desires to earn a return of 5% on its investment.
4. Collectibility of the payments by Castle Leasing is probable.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries on the books of Castle Leasing to reflect the
payments received under the lease and to recognize income for the years
2022 and 2023.
b. Assuming that Jan Way exercises its option to purchase the equipment on
December 31, 2023, prepare the journal entry to record the sale on Castle
Leasing’s books.
E21.7 (LO 2, 3) (Type of Lease, Amortization Schedule) Macinski Leasing
leases a new machine to Sharrer SA. The machine has a cost of €70,000 and fair
value of €95,000. Under the 3-year, non-cancelable contract, Sharrer will receive

--- Page 1984 ---
title to the machine at the end of the lease. The machine has a 3-year useful life
and no residual value. The lease was signed on January 1, 2022. Macinski expects
to earn an 8% return on its investment, and this implicit rate is known by Sharrer.
The annual rentals are payable on each December 31, beginning December 31,
2022.
Instructions
a. Discuss the nature of the lease arrangement and the accounting method that
each party to the lease should apply.
b. Prepare an amortization schedule that would be suitable for both the lessor
and the lessee, and which covers all the years involved.
c. Prepare the journal entry at commencement of the lease for Macinski.
d. Prepare the journal entry at commencement of the lease for Sharrer.
e. Prepare the journal entry at commencement of the lease for Sharrer,
assuming that (1) Sharrer does not know Macinski’s implicit rate (Sharrer’s
incremental borrowing rate is 9%), and that (2) Sharrer incurs initial directs
costs of €10,000.
E21.8 (LO 3) (Lessor Entries, Sales-Type Lease) Crosley Company, a
machinery dealer, leased a machine to Dexter Corporation on January 1, 2022.
The lease is for an 8-year period and requires equal annual payments of $35,004
at the beginning of each year. The first payment is received on January 1, 2022.
Crosley had purchased the machine during 2021 for $160,000. Collectibility of
lease payments by Crosley is probable. Crosley set the annual rental to ensure a
6% rate of return. The machine has an economic life of 10 years with no residual
value and reverts to Crosley at the termination of the lease.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of the lease receivable.
b. Prepare all necessary journal entries for Crosley for 2022.
c. Suppose the collectibility of the lease payments was not probable for Crosley.
Prepare all necessary journal entries for the company in 2022.
d. Suppose at the end of the lease term, Crosley receives the asset and
determines that it actually has a fair value of $1,000 instead of the anticipated
residual value of $0. Record the entry to recognize the receipt of the asset for
Crosley at the end of the lease term.
E21.9 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Entries, Initial Direct Costs) Use the information
for Crosley Company in E21.8. Assume that Dexter Corporation does not know the

--- Page 1985 ---
rate implicit in the lease used by Crosley, and Dexter’s incremental borrowing rate
is 8%. In addition, assume that Dexter incurs initial direct costs of $15,000.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of the lease liability and right-of-use asset for Dexter.
b. Prepare all necessary journal entries for Dexter for 2022.
E21.10 (LO 2) (Lessee Entries with Bargain Purchase Option) The
following facts pertain to a non-cancelable lease agreement between Mooney
Leasing and Choi Group, a lessee (amounts in thousands).
Commencement date
May 1,
2022
Annual lease payment due at the beginning of each year, beginning
with May 1, 2022
¥20,471.94
Bargain purchase option price at end of lease term
¥4,000.00
Lease term
5 years
Economic life of leased equipment
10 years
Lessor’s cost
¥65,000.00
Fair value of asset at May 1, 2022
¥91,000.00
Lessor’s implicit rate
8%
Lessee’s incremental borrowing rate
8%
The collectibility of the lease payments by Mooney is probable.
Instructions
(Round all numbers to the nearest yen.)
a. Prepare a lease amortization schedule for Choi for the 5-year lease term.
b. Prepare the journal entries on the lessee’s books to reflect the signing of the
lease agreement and to record the payments and expenses related to this
lease for the years 2022 and 2023. Choi’s annual accounting period ends on
December 31. Reversing entries are used by Choi.
E21.11 (LO 3) (Lessor Entries with Bargain Purchase Option) A lease
agreement between Mooney Leasing and Choi Group is described in E21.10.
Instructions
Refer to the data in E21.10 and do the following for the lessor. (Round all
numbers to the nearest yen).

--- Page 1986 ---
a. Discuss the nature of this lease for Mooney and compute the amount of the
lease receivable at commencement of the lease.
b. Prepare a lease amortization schedule for Mooney for the 5-year lease term.
c. Prepare the journal entries to reflect the signing of the lease agreement and
to record the receipts and income related to this lease for the years 2022 and
2023. The lessor’s accounting period ends on December 31. Reversing entries
are not used by Mooney.
d. Suppose the collectibility of the lease payments was not probable for Mooney.
Prepare all necessary journal entries for the company in 2022.
E21.12 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Lessee-Lessor Entries, Sales-Type Lease with
Bargain Purchase Option) On January 1, 2022, Bensen Company leased
equipment to Flynn Corporation. The following information pertains to this lease.
1. The term of the non-cancelable lease is 6 years. At the end of the lease term,
Flynn has the option to purchase the equipment for $1,000, while the
expected residual value at the end of the lease is $5,000.
2. Equal rental payments are due on January 1 of each year, beginning in 2022.
3. The fair value of the equipment on January 1, 2022, is $150,000, and its cost
is $120,000.
4. The equipment has an economic life of 8 years. Flynn depreciates all of its
equipment on a straight-line basis.
5. Bensen set the annual rental to ensure a 5% rate of return. Flynn’s
incremental borrowing rate is 6%, and the implicit rate of the lessor is
unknown.
6. Collectibility of lease payments by the lessor is probable.
Instructions
(Both the lessor and the lessee’s accounting periods end on December 31.)
a. Discuss the nature of this lease for Bensen.
b. Calculate the amount of the annual rental payment.
c. Prepare all the necessary journal entries for Bensen for 2022.
d. Suppose the collectibility of the lease payments was not probable for Bensen.
Prepare all necessary journal entries for the company in 2022.
e. Prepare all the necessary journal entries for Flynn for 2022.
f. Discuss the effect on the journal entry for Flynn at lease commencement,
assuming initial direct costs of $2,000 are incurred by Flynn to negotiate the

--- Page 1987 ---
lease.
E21.13 (LO 2, 3) (Lessee-Lessor Entries, Sales-Type Lease; Guaranteed
Residual Value) Phelps plc leases a building to Walsh Ltd. on January 1, 2022.
The following facts pertain to the lease agreement.
1. The lease term is 5 years, with equal annual rental payments of £4,703 at the
beginning of each year.
2. Ownership does not transfer at the end of the lease term, there is no bargain
purchase option, and the asset is not of a specialized nature.
3. The building has a fair value of £23,000, a book value to Phelps of £16,000,
and a useful life of 6 years.
4. At the end of the lease term, Phelps and Walsh expect there to be an
unguaranteed residual value of £4,000.
5. Phelps wants to earn a return of 8% on the lease, and collectibility of the
payments is probable. This rate is known by Walsh.
Instructions
a. How would Phelps (lessor) classify this lease? How would Phelps initially
measure the lease receivable, and how would Walsh initially measure the
lease liability and right-of-use asset?
b. Using the original facts of the lease, show the journal entries to be made by
both Phelps and Walsh in 2022.
c. Suppose the entire expected residual value of £4,000 is guaranteed by Walsh.
How will this change your answer to part (a)?
d. Assume the same facts as in part (c), except the expected residual value is
£3,000. Does your answer change?
E21.14 (LO 2) (Lessee Entries) Use the information for the Phelps/Walsh
lease in E21.13. In this instance, however, Walsh is unaware of the implicit rate
used in the lease by Phelps and has an incremental borrowing rate of 9%.
Instructions
How would your answer to E21.13(a) change?
E21.15 (LO 2) (Amortization Schedule and Journal Entries for Lessee)
Laura Leasing SA signs an agreement on January 1, 2022, to lease equipment to
Plote AG. The following information relates to this agreement.

--- Page 1988 ---
1. The term of the non-cancelable lease is 3 years with no renewal option. The
equipment has an estimated economic life of 5 years.
2. The fair value of the asset at January 1, 2022, is €80,000.
3. The asset will revert to the lessor at the end of the lease term, at which time
the asset is expected to have a residual value of €7,000, none of which is
guaranteed.
4. The agreement requires equal annual rental payments of €25,562.96 to the
lessor, beginning on January 1, 2022.
5. The lessee’s incremental borrowing rate is 5%. The lessor’s implicit rate is 4%
and is unknown to the lessee.
6. Plote uses the straight-line depreciation method for all equipment.
Instructions
(Round all numbers to the nearest cent.)
a. Prepare an amortization schedule that would be suitable for the lessee for the
lease term.
b. Prepare all of the journal entries for the lessee for 2022 and 2023 to record
the lease agreement, the lease payments, and all expenses related to this
lease. Assume the lessee’s annual accounting period ends on December 31,
and the lessee prepares reversing entries.
E21.16 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Accounting, Initial Direct Costs) Rauch AG leases
a piece of equipment to Donahue SA on January 1, 2022. The lease agreement
called for annual rental payments of €4,892 at the beginning of each year of the 4-
year lease. The equipment has an economic useful life of 6 years, a fair value of
€25,000, and a book value of €20,000. Both parties expect a residual value of
€8,250 at the end of the lease term, though this amount is not guaranteed. Rauch
set the lease payments with the intent of earning a 5% return, and Donahue is
aware of this rate. There is no bargain purchase option, ownership of the lease
does not transfer at the end of the lease term, and the asset is not of a specialized
nature.
Instructions
a. Prepare the lease amortization schedule(s) for Donahue for all 4 years of the
lease.
b. Prepare the journal entries for Donahue for 2022 and 2023.
c. Suppose Donahue incurs initial direct costs of €750 related to the lease.
Prepare the journal entries for 2022.

--- Page 1989 ---
d. Explain how a fully guaranteed residual value by Donahue would change the
accounting for the company. The expected residual value is €8,250.
e. Explain how a bargain renewal option for one extra year at the end of the
lease term would change the accounting of the lease for Donahue.
E21.17 (LO 3, 4) (Lessor Accounting) Use the information for Rauch AG and
Donahue SA from E21.16.
Instructions
a. Explain how Rauch arrived at the amount of the rental payments used in the
lease agreement, and show calculations.
b. Prepare the entries for Rauch for 2022.
c. Suppose that instead of €8,250, Rauch expects the residual value at the end
of the lease to be €5,000, but Donahue agrees to guarantee a residual value of
€8,250. All other facts being equal, how would Rauch change the amount of
the annual rental payments, if at all?
d. Explain how a fully guaranteed residual value by Donahue would change the
accounting for Rauch, the lessor.
e. Explain how a bargain renewal option for one extra year at the end of the
lease term would change the accounting of the lease for Rauch, the lessor.
*E21.18 (LO 5) (Sale-Leaseback) Assume that on January 1, 2022,
Humphrey’s Restaurants NV sells a computer system to Liquidity Finance for
€680,000 and immediately leases back the computer system. The relevant
information is as follows.
1. The computer was carried on Humphrey’s books at a value of €600,000.
2. The term of the non-cancelable lease is 3 years; title will not transfer to
Humphrey’s, and the expected residual value at the end of the lease is
€450,000, all of which is unguaranteed.
3. The lease agreement requires equal rental payments of €115,970 at the
beginning of each year.
4. The incremental borrowing rate for Humphrey’s is 8%. Humphrey’s is aware
that Liquidity Finance set the annual rental to ensure a rate of return of 8%.
5. The computer has a fair value of €680,000 on January 1, 2022, and an
estimated economic life of 10 years.
Instructions

--- Page 1990 ---
Prepare the journal entries for both the lessee and the lessor for 2022 to reflect
the sale and leaseback agreement.
*E21.19 (LO 5) (Lessee-Lessor, Sale-Leaseback) Respond to the
requirements in each situation.
Instructions
a. On January 1, 2022, Zarle Inc. sold computer equipment to Daniell Co. The
sales price of the equipment was $520,000 and its carrying amount is
$400,000. Record any journal entries necessary for Zarle from the sale of the
computer equipment in 2022.
b. Use the information from part (a). Assume that on the same day the sale
occurred, Zarle enters into an agreement to lease the equipment from Daniell
for 10 years with annual lease payments of $67,342.42 at the end of each year,
beginning on December 31, 2022. If Zarle has an incremental borrowing rate
of 5% and the equipment has an economic useful life of 10 years, record any
journal entries necessary for Zarle from the sale and leaseback of computer
equipment in 2022.
c. Use the information from part (b). Now, instead of 10 years, the lease term is
only 3 years with annual lease payments of $67,342.42 at the beginning of
each year. Record any journal entries necessary for Zarle from the sale and
leaseback of computer equipment in 2022.
Problems
P21.1 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Entries) The following facts pertain to a non-
cancelable lease agreement between Faldo Leasing and Vance plc, a lessee.
Commencement date
January 1,
2022
Annual lease payment due at the beginning of each year, beginning
with January 1, 2022
£113,864
Residual value of equipment at end of lease term, guaranteed by the
lessee
£50,000
Expected residual value of equipment at end of lease term
£45,000
Lease term
6 years
Economic life of leased equipment
6 years
Fair value of asset at January 1, 2022
£600,000
Lessor’s implicit rate
8%
Lessee’s incremental borrowing rate
8%

--- Page 1991 ---
The asset will revert to the lessor at the end of the lease term. The lessee uses the
straight-line depreciation for all leased equipment.
Instructions
a. Prepare an amortization schedule that would be suitable for the lessee for the
lease term.
b. Prepare all of the journal entries for the lessee for 2022 and 2023 to record
the lease agreement, the lease payments, and all expenses related to this
lease. Assume the lessee’s annual accounting period ends on December 31,
and the lessee prepares reversing entries.
c. Suppose Vance received a lease incentive of £5,000 from Faldo Leasing to
enter the lease. How would the initial measurement of the lease liability and
right-of-use asset be affected? What if Vance prepaid rent of £5,000 to Faldo?
P21.2 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Entries and Statement of Financial Position
Presentation) On January 1, 2022, Cage Company contracts to lease equipment
for 5 years, agreeing to make a payment of $120,987 at the beginning of each year,
starting January 1, 2022. The leased equipment is to be capitalized at $550,000.
The asset is to be amortized on a double-declining-balance basis, and the
obligation is to be reduced on an effective-interest basis. Cage’s incremental
borrowing rate is 6%, and the company knows that the implicit rate in the lease is
5%. Title to the equipment transfers to Cage at the end of the lease. The asset has
an estimated useful life of 5 years and no residual value.
Instructions
a. Explain the probable relationship of the $550,000 amount to the lease
arrangement.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries that Cage should record on January 1,
2022.
c. Prepare the journal entries to record depreciation of the leased asset and
interest expense for the year 2022.
d. Prepare the journal entry to record the lease payment of January 1, 2023,
assuming reversing entries are not made.
e. What amounts will appear on the lessee’s December 31, 2022, statement of
financial position relative to the lease contract?
f. How would the value of the lease liability in (b) change if Cage also agreed to
pay the fixed annual insurance on the equipment of $2,000 at the same time
as the rental payments?

--- Page 1992 ---
P21.3 (LO 2) 
 (Lessee Entries and Statement of Financial
Position Presentation) Ludwick Steel SA, as lessee, signed a lease agreement
for equipment for 5 years, beginning December 31, 2022. Annual rental payments
of €40,000 are to be made at the beginning of each lease year (December 31). The
interest rate used by the lessor in setting the payment schedule is 6%; Ludwick’s
incremental borrowing rate is 8%. Ludwick is unaware of the rate being used by
the lessor. At the end of the lease, Ludwick has the option to buy the equipment
for €5,000, considerably below its estimated fair value at that time. The
equipment has an estimated useful life of 7 years, with no residual value. Ludwick
uses the straight-line method of depreciation on similar owned equipment.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry or entries, with explanations, that Ludwick should
record on December 31, 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries, with explanations, that Ludwick should
record on December 31, 2023. (Prepare the lease amortization schedule for all
five payments.)
c. Prepare the journal entry or entries, with explanations, that Ludwick should
record on December 31, 2024.
d. What amounts would appear on Ludwick’s December 31, 2024, statement of
financial position relative to the lease arrangement?
P21.4 (LO 2) (Lessee Entries, Lease with Monthly Payments) Shapiro Inc.
began operations in 2021 as a computer software service firm, with an accounting
fiscal year ending August 31. Shapiro’s primary product is a sophisticated online
inventory-control system; its customers pay a fixed fee plus a usage charge for
using the system.
Shapiro has leased a large, Alpha-3 computer system from the manufacturer. The
lease calls for a monthly rental of $40,000 for the 144 months (12 years) of the
lease term. The estimated useful life of the computer is 15 years.
All rentals are payable on the first day of the month beginning August 1, 2022, the
date the computer was installed and the lease agreement was signed. The lease is
non-cancelable for its 12-year term, and it is secured only by the manufacturer’s
chattel lien on the Alpha-3 system.
This leased asset will be depreciated by the straight-line method. Borrowed funds
for this type of transaction would cost Shapiro 6% per year (0.5% per month).
Following is a schedule of the present value of an annuity due for selected periods
discounted at 0.5% per period when payments are made at the beginning of each
period.
Periods Present Value of an Annuity Due 

--- Page 1993 ---
(months)
Discounted at 0.5% per Period
1
1.000
2
1.995
3
2.985
143
102.497
144
102.987
Instructions
Prepare all entries Shapiro should make in its accounting records during August
2022 relating to this lease. Give full explanations and show supporting
computations for each entry. Remember, August 31, 2022, is the end of Shapiro’s
fiscal accounting period, and it will be preparing financial statements on that date.
Do not prepare closing entries.
P21.5 (LO 2) (Basic Lessee Accounting with Difficult PV Calculation) In
2021, Grishell Trucking negotiated and closed a long-term lease contract for newly
constructed truck terminals and freight storage facilities. The buildings were
erected to the company’s specifications on land owned by the company. On
January 1, 2022, Grishell Trucking took possession of the lease properties.
Although the terminals have a composite useful life of 40 years, the non-
cancelable lease runs for 20 years from January 1, 2022, with a bargain purchase
option available upon expiration of the lease.
The 20-year lease is effective for the period January 1, 2022, through December
31, 2041. Rental payments of $800,000 are payable to the lessor on January 1 of
each of the first 10 years of the lease term. Advance rental payments of $320,000
are due on January 1 for each of the last 10 years of the lease. The company has an
option to purchase all of these leased facilities for $1 on December 31, 2041. The
lease was negotiated to assure the lessor a 6% rate of return.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule to compute for Grishell Trucking the present value of the
terminal facilities and related obligation at January 1, 2022.
b. Assuming that the present value of terminal facilities and related obligation
at January 1, 2022, was $7,635,410, prepare journal entries for Grishell
Trucking to record the:
1. Cash payment to the lessor on January 1, 2024.
2. Depreciation of the cost of the leased properties for 2024, using the
straight-line method and assuming a zero residual value.
3. Accrual of interest expense at December 31, 2024.

--- Page 1994 ---
Selected present value factors are as follows.
Periods
For an Ordinary 
Annuity of $1 at 6% For $1 at 6%
1
.943396
.943396
2
1.833393
.889996
8
6.209794
.627412
9
6.801692
.591898
10
7.360087
.558395
19
11.158117
.330513
20
11.469921
.311805
P21.6 (LO 2, 3) (Lessee-Lessor Entries, Lease with a Guaranteed
Residual Value) Glaus Leasing AG agrees to lease equipment to Jensen
Furniture on January 1, 2022. The following information relates to the lease
agreement.
1. The term of the lease is 7 years with no renewal option, and the machinery
has an estimated economic life of 9 years.
2. The cost of the machinery is €525,000, and the fair value of the asset on
January 1, 2022, is €700,000.
3. At the end of the lease term, the asset reverts to the lessor and has a
guaranteed residual value of €50,000. Jensen estimates that the expected
residual value at the end of the lease term will be €50,000. Jensen
depreciates all of its leased equipment on a straight-line basis.
4. The lease agreement requires equal annual rental payments, beginning on
January 1, 2022.
5. The collectibility of the lease payments is probable.
6. Glaus desires a 5% rate of return on its investments. Jensen’s incremental
borrowing rate is 6%, and the lessor’s implicit rate is unknown.
Instructions
(Assume the accounting period ends on December 31.)
a. Discuss the nature of this lease for the lessor.
b. Calculate the amount of the annual rental payment required.
c. Compute the value of the lease liability to the lessee.

--- Page 1995 ---
d. Prepare the journal entries Jensen would make in 2022 and 2023 related to
the lease arrangement.
e. Prepare the journal entries Glaus would make in 2022 and 2023 related to the
lease arrangement.
f. Suppose Jensen expects the residual value at the end of the lease term to be
€40,000 but still guarantees a residual of €50,000. Compute the value of the
lease liability at lease commencement.
P21.7 (LO 3) (Lessor Computations and Entries, Sales-Type Lease with
Guaranteed Residual Value) Amirante SA manufactures an X-ray machine
with an estimated life of 12 years and leases it to Chambers Medical Center for a
period of 10 years. The normal selling price of the machine is R$495,678, and its
guaranteed residual value at the end of the non-cancelable lease term is estimated
to be R$15,000. The hospital will pay rents of R$60,000 at the beginning of each
year. Amirante incurred R$300,000 in manufacturing costs and R$14,000 in legal
fees directly related to the signing of the lease. Amirante has determined that the
collectibility of the lease payments is probable and that the implicit interest rate is
5%.
Instructions
a. Discuss the nature of this lease in relation to the lessor and compute the
amount of each of the following items.
1. Lease receivable at commencement of the lease.
2. Sales price.
3. Cost of sales.
b. Prepare a 10-year lease amortization schedule for Amirante, the lessor.
c. Prepare all of Amirante’s journal entries for the first year.
P21.8 (LO 2, 4) (Lessee Computations and Entries, Lease with
Guaranteed Residual Value) Assume the same data as in P21.7 and that
Chambers Medical Center has an incremental borrowing rate of 5% and an
expected residual value at the end of the lease of R$10,000.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of the initial lease liability.
b. Prepare a 10-year lease amortization schedule.
c. Prepare all of the lessee’s journal entries for the first year.

--- Page 1996 ---
d. Suppose Chambers Medical Center incurred R$7,000 of document
preparation costs after the execution of the lease. How would the initial
measurement of the lease liability and right-of-use asset be affected?
P21.9 (LO 3, 4) 
 (Lessor Computations and Entries, Sales-Type
Lease with Unguaranteed Residual Value) Kobayashi Group manufactures a
check-in kiosk with an estimated economic life of 12 years and leases it to Japan
Airlines (JAL) (JPN) for a period of 10 years. The normal selling price (amounts
in thousands) of the equipment is ¥299,140, and its unguaranteed residual value
at the end of the lease term is estimated to be ¥20,000. JAL will pay annual
payments of ¥40,000 at the beginning of each year. Kobayashi incurred costs of
¥180,000 in manufacturing the equipment and ¥4,000 in sales commissions in
closing the lease. Kobayashi has determined that the collectibility of the lease
payments is probable and that the implicit interest rate is 8%.
Instructions
a. Discuss the nature of this lease in relation to the lessor and compute the
amount of each of the following items.
1. Lease receivable.
2. Sales price.
3. Cost of goods sold.
b. Prepare a 10-year lease amortization schedule for Kobayashi, the lessor.
c. Prepare all of the lessor’s journal entries for the first year.
P21.10 (LO 2) (Lessee Computations and Entries, Lease with
Unguaranteed Residual Value) Assume the same data as in P21.9, with JAL
(JPN) having an incremental borrowing rate of 8%.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of the initial lease liability.
b. Prepare a 10-year lease amortization schedule.
c. Prepare all of the lessee’s journal entries for the first year. Assume straight-
line depreciation.
P21.11 (LO 2, 3) 
 (Lessee-Lessor Accounting for Residual
Values) Goring Dairy leases its milking equipment from King Finance Company
under the following lease terms.
1. The lease term is 10 years, non-cancelable, and requires equal rental
payments of $30,300 due at the beginning of each year starting January 1,

--- Page 1997 ---
2022.
2. The equipment has a fair value at the commencement of the lease (January 1,
2022) of $242,741 and a cost of $180,000 on King Finance’s books. It also has
an estimated economic life of 15 years and an expected residual value of
$45,000, though Goring Dairy has guaranteed a residual value of $50,000 to
King Finance.
3. The lease contains no renewal options, and the equipment reverts to King
Finance upon termination of the lease. The equipment is not of a specialized
nature.
4. Goring Dairy’s incremental borrowing rate is 8% per year. The implicit rate is
also 8%.
5. Goring Dairy depreciates similar equipment that it owns on a straight-line
basis.
6. Collectibility of the payments is probable.
Instructions
a. Evaluate the criteria for classification of the lease by the lessor, and describe
the nature of the lease. In general, discuss how the lessee and lessor should
account for the lease transaction.
b. Prepare the journal entries for the lessee and lessor at January 1, 2022, and
December 31, 2022 (the lessee’s and lessor’s year-end). Assume no reversing
entries.
c. What would have been the amount of the initial lease liability recorded by the
lessee upon the commencement of the lease if:
1. The residual value of $50,000 had been guaranteed by a third party, not
the lessee?
2. The residual value of $50,000 had not been guaranteed at all?
d. On the lessor’s books, what would be the amount recorded as the lease
receivable at the commencement of the lease, assuming the residual value of
$50,000 had not been guaranteed at all?
P21.12 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Lessee-Lessor Entries, Statement of Financial
Position Presentation, Finance and Sales-Type Lease) Winston Industries
and Ewing SA enter into an agreement that requires Ewing to build three diesel-
electric engines to Winston’s specifications. Upon completion of the engines,
Winston has agreed to lease them for a period of 10 years and to assume all costs
and risks of ownership. The lease is non-cancelable, becomes effective on January

--- Page 1998 ---
1, 2022, and requires annual rental payments of €384,532 each January 1, starting
January 1, 2022.
Winston’s incremental borrowing rate is 8%. The implicit interest rate used by
Ewing and known to Winston is 6%. The total cost of building the three engines is
€2,600,000. The economic life of the engines is estimated to be 10 years, with
residual value set at zero. Winston depreciates similar equipment on a straight-
line basis. At the end of the lease, Winston assumes title to the engines.
Collectibility of the lease payments is probable.
Instructions
a. Discuss the nature of this lease transaction from the viewpoint of the lessor.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record the transaction on January 1,
2022, on the books of Winston (the lessee).
c. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record the transaction on January 1,
2022, on the books of Ewing (the lessor).
d. Prepare the journal entries for both the lessee and lessor to record the first
rental payment on January 1, 2022.
e. Prepare the journal entries for both the lessee and lessor to record any entries
needed in connection with the lease at December 31, 2022. (Prepare a lease
amortization schedule for 2 years.)
f. Show the items and amounts that would be reported on the statement of
financial position (not notes) at December 31, 2022, for both the lessee and
the lessor.
g. Assume that Winston incurs legal fees related to the execution of the lease of
€30,000. In addition, assume Winston receives a lease incentive from Ewing
of €50,000 to enter the lease. How will this affect your answer to part (b)?
P21.13 (LO 2, 4) (Statement of Financial Position and Income
Statement Disclosure—Lessee) The following facts pertain to a non-
cancelable lease agreement between Alschuler Leasing and McKee Electronics, a
lessee, for a computer system.
Commencement date
October 1,
2022
Lease term
6 years
Economic life of leased equipment
6 years
Fair value of asset at October 1, 2022
£313,043
Book value of asset at October 1, 2022
£280,000
Residual value at end of lease term
–0–

--- Page 1999 ---
Lessor’s implicit rate
8%
Lessee’s incremental borrowing rate
8%
Annual lease payment due at the beginning of each year, beginning
with October 1, 2022
£62,700
The collectibility of the lease payments is probable by the lessor. The asset will
revert to the lessor at the end of the lease term. The straight-line depreciation
method is used for all equipment.
The following amortization schedule has been prepared correctly for use by both
the lessor and the lessee in accounting for this lease. The lease is to be accounted
for properly as a sales-type lease.
Date
Lease
Payment/
Receipt
Interest (8%)
on Unpaid 
Liability/Receivable
Reduction
of Lease 
Liability/Receivable
Balance of
Lease 
Liability/Receivable
10/01/22
£313,043
10/01/22
£62,700
£ 62,700
250,343
10/01/23
62,700
£20,027
42,673
207,670
10/01/24
62,700
16,614
46,086
161,584
10/01/25
62,700
12,927
49,773
111,811
10/01/26
62,700
8,945
53,755
58,056
10/01/27
62,700
4,644
58,056
–0–
£376,200
£63,157
£313,043
Instructions
a. Assuming the lessee’s accounting period ends on September 30, answer the
following questions with respect to this lease agreement.
1. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s income statement
for the year ending September 30, 2023?
2. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s statement of
financial position at September 30, 2023?
3. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s income statement
for the year ending September 30, 2024?
4. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s statement of
financial position at September 30, 2024?
b. Assuming the lessee’s accounting period ends on December 31, answer the
following questions with respect to this lease agreement.

--- Page 2000 ---
1. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s income statement
for the year ending December 31, 2022?
2. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s statement of
financial position at December 31, 2022?
3. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s income statement
for the year ending December 31, 2023?
4. What items and amounts will appear on the lessee’s statement of
financial position at December 31, 2023?
P21.14 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Lessor Operating Lease) Lewis Machinery Works
entered into a lease agreement on January 1, 2022, to provide Garcia SA with a
piece of machinery. The terms of the lease agreement were as follows.
1. The lease is to be for 3 years with rental payments of R$10,521 to be made at
the beginning of each year.
2. The machinery has a fair value of R$55,000, a book value of R$40,000, and
an economic life of 8 years.
3. At the end of the lease term, both parties expect the machinery to have a
residual value of R$30,000, none of which is guaranteed.
4. The lease does not transfer ownership at the end of the lease term, and does
not have a bargain purchase option, and the asset is not of a specialized
nature.
5. Garcia knows that the implicit rate is 6%.
6. Collectibility of the payments is probable.
Instructions
a. Evaluate the criteria for classification of the lease, and describe the nature of
the lease.
b. Prepare the amortization schedule Garcia will use over the lease term.
c. Prepare the 2022 journal entries for Garcia.
d. Prepare the 2022 journal entries for Lewis.
e. Suppose the lease were only for 1 year instead of 3 years, with just one lease
payment at the beginning of the lease term. Prepare any journal entries
Garcia would need, assuming it elects to use the short-term lease option.
P21.15 (LO 2, 3) 
 (Lessee-Lessor Entries, Lease with an
Unguaranteed Residual Value) Cleveland Group leased a new crane to
Abriendo Construction under a 5-year, non-cancelable contract starting January 1,

--- Page 2001 ---
2022. Terms of the lease require payments of R$48,555 each January 1, starting
January 1, 2022. The crane has an estimated life of 7 years, a fair value of
R$240,000, and a cost to Cleveland of R$240,000. The estimated fair value of the
crane is expected to be R$45,000 (unguaranteed) at the end of the lease term. No
bargain purchase or renewal options are included in the contract, and the crane is
not a specialized asset. Both Cleveland and Abriendo adjust and close books
annually at December 31. Collectibility of the lease payments is probable.
Abriendo’s incremental borrowing rate is 8%, and Cleveland’s implicit interest
rate of 8% is known to Abriendo.
Instructions
a. Identify the type of lease involved and give reasons for your classification.
Discuss the accounting treatment that should be applied by the lessor.
b. Prepare all the entries related to the lease contract and leased asset for the
year 2022 for the lessee and lessor, assuming Abriendo uses straight-line
depreciation for all similar leased assets, and Cleveland depreciates the asset
on a straight-line basis with a residual value of R$15,000.
c. Discuss what should be presented in the statement of financial position, the
income statement, and the related notes of both the lessee and the lessor at
December 31, 2022.
Concepts for Analysis
CA21.1 (LO 2) 
 (Lessee Accounting and Reporting) On January 1,
2022, Evans Company entered into a non-cancelable lease for a machine to be
used in its manufacturing operations. The lease transfers control of the machine
to Evans by the end of the lease term. The term of the lease is 8 years, which
equals the useful life of the asset. The lease payment made by Evans on January 1,
2022, was one of 8 equal annual payments.
Instructions
a. What is the theoretical basis for the accounting standard that requires long-
term leases to be capitalized by the lessee?
b. How should Evans account for this lease at its commencement?
c. What expenses directly related to lease liability and right-of-use asset will
Evans incur during the first year of the lease, and how will these expenses be
determined?
d. How should Evans report the lease transaction on its December 31, 2022,
statement of financial position?

--- Page 2002 ---
CA21.2 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Lessor and Lessee Accounting and Disclosure)
Sylvan SA entered into a non- cancelable lease arrangement with Breton Leasing
for a certain machine. Breton’s primary business is leasing. Sylvan will lease the
machine for a period of 3 years, which is 50% of the machine’s economic life.
Breton will take possession of the machine at the end of the initial 3-year lease
and lease it to another, smaller company that does not need the most current
version of the machine. Sylvan does not guarantee any residual value for the
machine and will not purchase the machine at the end of the lease term. Sylvan’s
incremental borrowing rate is 10%, and the implicit rate in the lease is 9%. Sylvan
has no way of knowing the implicit rate used by Breton. Using either rate, the
present value of the lease payments is between 90% and 100% of the fair value of
the machine at the date of the lease agreement. Breton is reasonably certain that
Sylvan will pay all lease payments.
Instructions
a. With respect to Sylvan (the lessee), answer the following.
1. How should Sylvan compute the appropriate amount to be recorded for
the lease or asset acquired?
2. What accounts will be created or affected by this transaction, and how
will the lease or asset and other costs related to the transaction be
recorded in earnings?
3. What disclosures must Sylvan make regarding this leased asset?
b. With respect to Breton (the lessor), answer the following.
1. What type of leasing arrangement has been entered into? Explain the
reason for your answer.
2. How should this lease be recorded by Breton, and how are the
appropriate amounts determined?
3. How should Breton determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be
recognized from each lease payment?
4. What disclosures must Breton make regarding this lease?
CA21.3 (LO 2) (Lessee Accounting) On January 1, Santiago SA, a lessee,
entered into three non-cancelable leases for new equipment, Lease L, Lease M,
and Lease N. None of the three leases transfers ownership of the equipment to
Santiago at the end of the lease term. The following information is specific to each
lease.
1. Lease L does not contain a bargain purchase option.

--- Page 2003 ---
2. Lease M contains a bargain purchase option. The lease term is equal to 50%
of the estimated economic life of the equipment.
3. Lease N does not contain a bargain purchase option. The lease term is equal
to 50% of the estimated economic life of the equipment.
Instructions
a. What amount, if any, should Santiago record as a liability at commencement
of the lease for each of the three leases above?
b. Assuming that the lease payments are made on a straight-line basis, how
should Santiago record each lease payment for each of the three leases above?
CA21.4 (LO 2, 4) 
 (Lease Capitalization, Bargain Purchase Option)
Bader Corporation entered into a lease agreement for 100 photocopy machines for
its company headquarters. The lease has a bargain purchase option because after
the 5-year lease term, the company can purchase each copier for $1,000, when the
anticipated fair value is $2,500.
Jerry Suffolk, the financial vice president, thinks the financial statements must
recognize the lease agreement for a higher amount because of the bargain
purchase option. The controller, Diane Buchanan, disagrees: “Although I don’t
know much about the copiers themselves, there is a way to avoid recording the
higher lease liability.” She argues that the company could claim that copier
technology advances rapidly and that by the end of the lease term, the machines
will most likely not be worth the $1,000 bargain price.
Instructions
a. What ethical issue is at stake?
b. Should the controller’s argument be accepted if she does not really know
much about copier technology? Would it make a difference if the controller
were knowledgeable about the rate of change in copier technology?
c. What should Suffolk do?
CA21.5 (LO 2, 4) 
 (Short-Term Lease vs. Finance Lease) You are
auditing the December 31, 2022, financial statements of Hockney plc,
manufacturer of novelties and party favors. During your inspection of the
company garage, you discovered that a used automobile not listed in the
equipment subsidiary ledger is parked there. You ask Stacy Reeder, plant manager,
about the vehicle, and she tells you that the company did not list the automobile
because the company was only leasing it and elected to use the short-term lease
accounting option for the lease. The lease agreement was entered into on January
1, 2022, with Crown New and Used Cars.

--- Page 2004 ---
You decide to review the lease agreement to ensure that the lease should be
afforded short-term lease treatment, and you discover the following lease terms.
1. Non-cancelable term of 2 years.
2. Rental of £3,240 per year (at the end of each year). (The present value at 8%
per year is £5,778.)
3. Expected residual value after 2 years is £500. (The present value at 8% per
year is £429.) Hockney guarantees the residual value of £500.
4. Estimated economic life of the automobile is 2.5 years.
5. Hockney’s incremental borrowing rate is 8% per year.
Instructions
You are a senior auditor writing a memo to your supervisor, the audit partner in
charge of this audit, to discuss the above situation. Be sure to include (a) why you
inspected the lease agreement, (b) what you determined about the lease, and (c)
how you advised your client to account for this lease. Explain every journal entry
that you believe is necessary to record this lease properly on the client’s books. (It
is also necessary to include the fact that you communicated this information to
your client.)
*CA21.6 (LO 5) (Sale-Leaseback) On January 1, 2022, Perriman Company
transferred equipment for cash and leased it back. As seller-lessee, Perriman
retained the right to substantially all of the remaining use of the equipment. The
term of the lease is 8 years.
Instructions
a. What is the major issue related to sale-leaseback accounting?
b. 
1. How should Perriman account for the sale portion of the sale-leaseback
transaction at January 1, 2022?
2. How should Perriman account for the leaseback portion of the sale-
leaseback transaction at January 1, 2022?
Using Your Judgment
Note that M&S and British Airways have not yet adopted the new lease
accounting rules. As a result, in the financial statements referred to
below, finance leases are referred to as “capital,” and assets and
liabilities related to operating leases are not recognized on the
statement of financial position.
Financial Reporting Problem

--- Page 2005 ---
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The
company’s complete annual report, including the notes to the financial
statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the
following questions.
a. What types of leases are used by M&S?
b. What amount of finance leases was reported by M&S in total and for less than
one year?
c. What minimum annual rental commitments under all non-cancelable leases
at year-end 2019 did M&S disclose?
Comparative Analysis Case
British Airways and Air France
Instructions
Go to the British Airways (GBR) and Air France (FRA) company websites and
use information found there to answer the following questions related to these
airlines.
a. What types of leases are used by Air France and on what assets are these
leases primarily used?
b. How long-term are some of Air France’s leases? What are some of the
characteristics or provisions of Air France’s (the lessee) leases?
c. What did Air France report in 2018 as its lease debt?
d. How does British Airways’ use of leases compare with Air France’s?
Financial Statement Analysis Case
Air France
Presented in Illustration 21.39 are the financial statement disclosures from the
2018 annual report of Air France (FRA).
Instructions
Answer the following questions related to these disclosures.

--- Page 2006 ---
a. What is the total obligation disclosed in the Lease Debt note at year-end 2018
for Air France?
b. What is the total of right-of-use assets for the year ended December 31, 2018,
for Air France?
c. Describe the nature of any lease arrangements not capitalized by Air France at
fiscal year-end 2018.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Salaur SpA, a risky start-up, is evaluating a lease arrangement being offered by
TSP AG for use of a standard computer system. The lease is non-cancelable, and in
no case does Salaur receive title to the computers during or at the end of the lease
term. TSP will lease the returned computers to other customers. The lease starts
on January 1, 2022, with the first rental payment due on January 1, 2022.
Additional information related to the lease and the underlying leased asset is as
follows.
Yearly rental
€3,057.25
Lease term
3 years
Estimated economic life
5 years
Purchase option
€3,000 at end of 3 years, which approximates fair
value
Renewal option
1 year at €1,500; no penalty for non-renewal;
standard renewal clause
Fair value at commencement
€10,000
Cost of asset to lessor
€8,000
Residual value:
Guaranteed
–0–
Unguaranteed
€3,000
Lessor’s implicit rate (known
by the lessee)
12%
Estimated fair value at end of
lease
€3,000
Accounting
a. Prepare the journal entries for Salaur for 2022.
b. Repeat the requirements in part (a), assuming Salaur has the option to
purchase the system at the end of the lease for €100.

--- Page 2007 ---
Analysis
Briefly discuss the impact of capitalizing this lease on two common ratios: return
on assets and debt to total assets.
Principles
What fundamental quality of useful information is being addressed when a
company like Salaur capitalizes all leases with terms of one year or longer?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), Appendix A, Defined Terms.
[2] The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting (London, U.K.: IASB,
2010), Chapter 4, par. 4.4.
[3] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), paras. BC41–56.
[4] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. BC156(b).
[5] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 27(c).
[6] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 26.
[7] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), Appendix A, Defined Terms.
[8] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. IN10.
[9] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 27(c).
[10] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 63.
[11] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. IN7(e) and 9(e).
[12] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 71(b).
[13] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. B33.

--- Page 2008 ---
[14] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), Appendix A, Defined Terms.
[15] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), paras. 69 and 83.
[16] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), paras. 59 and 92.
[17] International Financial Reporting Standard 16, Leases (London, U.K.: IFRS
Foundation, January 2016), par. 103.
Research Case
Daniel Hardware is considering alternative financing arrangements for equipment
used in its warehouses. Besides purchasing the equipment outright, Daniel is also
considering a lease. Accounting for the outright purchase is fairly straightforward,
but because Daniel has not used equipment leases in the past, the accounting staff
is less informed about the specific accounting rules for leases. The staff is aware
of some general lease rules related to “right-of-use,” but they are unsure how the
accounting rules apply to their situation. Daniel has asked you to conduct some
research on these items related to lease capitalization criteria.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website. When you have
accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet browser to
respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. What is included is the measurement of (1) the lease liability and (2) the
right-of-use asset?
b. Besides the non-cancelable term of the lease, what are other considerations in
determining the “lease term”?
c. When should a lessee account for a lease modification? What procedures are
followed?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 7
Compare the accounting procedures for leases under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
Leasing is a global business. Lessors and lessees enter into arrangements with one
another without regard to national boundaries. Although U.S. GAAP and IFRS
accounting guidance for leasing is not identical, both the FASB and the IASB

--- Page 2009 ---
decided that prior lease accounting did not provide the most useful, transparent,
and complete information about leasing transactions. In response, the FASB and
IASB worked together on a lease accounting project. The FASB issued an update to
its Codification, adding section 842, Leases (ASC 842), in February 2016. Many of
the requirements in the new FASB standard are the same as those in IFRS 16. The
main differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS under the new rules are in relation
to the lessee accounting model. Specifically, U.S. GAAP still maintains a
distinction between finance leases and operating leases in the financial
statements for lessees. As a result, lessees account for some leases using the
finance lease method, while accounting for operating leases (leases that convey
right of use but not ownership) is based on a straight-line lease expense approach.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS
related to the accounting for leases.
Similarities
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS share the same objective of recording leases by
lessees and lessors according to their economic substance—that is, according
to the definitions of assets and liabilities.
Much of the terminology for lease accounting in IFRS and U.S. GAAP is the
same.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require lessees to recognize a right-of-use asset and
related lease liability for leases with terms longer than one year.
Under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP, lessors use the same general criteria
(consistent with the recent standard on revenue) to determine if there is
transfer of control of the underlying asset and if lessors classify leases as
sales-type or operating.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS use the same lessor accounting model for leases
classified as sales-type or operating.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS have similar qualitative and quantitative disclosure
requirements for lessees and lessors.
Differences
U.S. GAAP continues to use a classification test for lessees under ASC 842.
Thus, lessees account for some leases using the finance lease method. Leases
classified as operating leases under U.S. GAAP will be accounted for
differently than under IFRS (see example in About the Numbers section
below).

--- Page 2010 ---
IFRS allows alternative measurement bases for the right-of-use asset (e.g.,
the revaluation model, in accordance with IAS 16, Property, Plant and
Equipment).
While both U.S. GAAP and IFRS have a short-term lease exception, U.S. GAAP
does not have the additional lessee recognition and measurement exemption
for leases of assets of low value (e.g., personal computers, small office
furniture).
IFRS 16 includes explicit guidance on collectibility of the lease payments by
lessors and amounts necessary to satisfy a residual value guarantee.
U.S. GAAP distinguishes between sales-type and direct financing leases for
lessors (which defers gross profit on direct financing leases). Therefore, IFRS
16 permits recognition of selling profit on direct financing leases at lease
commencement.
About the Numbers
Finance and Operating Leases (Lessee)
Under U.S. GAAP, both lessees and lessors classify lease arrangements as either
finance or operating. In either case, lessees capitalize all leased assets and
liabilities. Therefore, the statement of financial position (balance sheet) for a
lessee that uses either a finance lease or an operating lease will be the same.
Income effects for lessees depends on the type of lease. For a finance lease, the
lessee recognizes interest expense on the lease liability over the life of the lease
using the effective-interest method and records amortization expense on the
right-of-use asset generally on a straight-line basis. A lessee therefore reports both
interest expense and amortization of the right-of-use asset on the income
statement. As a result, the total expense for the lease transaction is generally
higher in the earlier years of the lease arrangement under a finance lease
arrangement.
In an operating lease, the lessee also measures interest on the liability using the
effective-interest method. However, the lessee amortizes the right-of-use asset
such that the total lease expense is the same from period to period. In other
words, for operating leases, only a single lease expense (comprised of interest on
the liability and amortization of the right-of-use asset) is recognized on the
income statement, typically on a straight-line basis. Illustrations of both these
approaches are shown in the following sections.
Lease Classification
Under U.S. GAAP, lessees and lessors use the same tests to determine whether to
use the finance method or the operating method. That is, the objective is to
classify a lease based on whether the arrangement is effectively a purchase of the
underlying asset. If the lease transfers control (or ownership) of the underlying

--- Page 2011 ---
asset to a lessee, then the lease is classified as a finance lease. All leases that do
not meet any of the finance lease tests are classified as operating leases. In an
operating lease, a lessee obtains the right to use the underlying asset but
not ownership of the asset itself. Specifically, for a lease to be a finance lease, it
must be non-cancelable and meet at least one of the five tests listed in
Illustration 21.18. Otherwise, the lease is an operating lease.
Lessee Accounting for Operating Leases
If a lease does not meet any of the lease classification tests for a finance lease, a
lessee should classify it as an operating lease. For leases classified as operating,
the lessee records a right-of-use asset and lease liability at commencement of the
lease. This is similar to the finance lease approach. However, the lessee records
the same amount for lease expense each period over the lease term (often referred
to as the straight-line method for expense measurement).
Companies continue to use the effective-interest method for amortizing the lease
liability. However, instead of reporting interest expense, a lessee records interest
on the lease liability as part of Lease Expense. In addition, the lessee no longer
reports amortization expense related to the right-of-use asset. Instead, it “plugs”
in an amount that increases the Lease Expense account so that it is the same
amount from period to period. This plugged amount then reduces the right-of-use
asset, such that both the right-of-use asset and the lease liability are amortized to
zero at the end of the lease.23
Operating Lease Example
To illustrate lessee accounting for an operating lease, consider the following terms
of a lease between Parker Shipping Co. and Stoughton Trailers Inc. for the right-
of-use of Stoughton’s standard hydraulic lifts. The lease, signed on January 1,
2022, specifies that Stoughton grants right-of-use of the lift to Parker under the
following standard terms.
The lease agreement is non-cancelable with a term of four years, requiring
equal rental payments of $9,538.39 with the first payment on January 1, 2022
(annuity-due basis).
The lift has a fair value at commencement of the lease of $40,000 and an
estimated economic life of six years. The lift has a residual value at the
end of the lease of $8,000 (unguaranteed). The cost of the lift on
Stoughton’s books is $30,000.
The lease contains no renewal options. The lift reverts to Stoughton at the
termination of the lease.
The implicit rate of Stoughton (the lessor) is 8 percent and is known by
Parker.

--- Page 2012 ---
Stoughton (the lessor) determines the rental payments such that it earns a rate of
return of 8 percent per year (implicit rate) on its investment, as shown in
Illustration GAAP21.1.
Fair value of leased equipment
$40,000.00
Less: Present value of the residual value ($8,000 × .73503 (PV4,8%))
5,880.24
Amount to be recovered by lessor through lease payments
$34,119.76
Four beginning-of-year lease payments to earn an 8% return
($34,119.76 ÷ 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%))
$ 9,538.39
ILLUSTRATION GAAP21.1 Computation of Lease Payments
The lease is classified as an operating lease by Parker and Stoughton, as indicated
by the analysis in Illustration GAAP21.2.
Test
Assessment
1. Transfer of
ownership
test
Transfer of ownership does not occur; the asset reverts to
Stoughton at the end of the lease.
2. Purchase
option test
There is no bargain purchase option in the lease.
3. Lease term
test
The lease term is 66.67% (4 ÷ 6) of the economic life of the asset,
which is less than the major part of the life of the asset (75%).
4. Present
value test
The present value of the lease payments is $34,119.76*, which is
85.3% ($34,119.76 ÷ $40,000) of the fair value of the lift.
Therefore, it does not meet the present value test.
5. Alternative
use test
The equipment is not of a specialized nature and is expected to
have use to Stoughton when returned at the end of the lease.
*$9,538.39 × 3.57710 (PVF-AD4,8%)
ILLUSTRATION GAAP21.2 Lease Classification Tests
Thus, the lease is classified as an operating lease by both the lessee and lessor, as
none of the classification tests are met. Parker makes the following entry to record
this operating lease and the first payment.

--- Page 2013 ---
January 1, 2022
Right-of-Use Asset 34,119.76
Lease Liability
34,119.76
Lease Liability
9,538.39
Cash
9,538.39
Illustration GAAP21.3 shows the interest expense and amortization of the
lease liability, applying the effective-interest method.
Parker Shipping Co.
Lease Amortization Schedule
Annuity-Due Basis
Date
Annual Lease 
Payment
Interest (8%) 
on Liability
Reduction of 
Lease Liability
Lease 
Liability
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1/1/22
$34,119.76
1/1/22
$ 9,538.39
$
-0-
$ 9,538.39
24,581.37
1/1/23
9,538.39
1,966.51
7,571.88
17,009.49
1/1/24
9,538.39
1,360.76
8,177.63
8,831.86
1/1/25
9,538.39
706.53*
8,831.86
0.00
$38,153.56
$4,033.80
$34,119.76
a. Lease payment as required by lease.
b. Eight percent of the preceding balance of (d) except for 1/1/22; since this is
an annuity due, no time has elapsed at the date of the first payment and
therefore no interest has accrued.
c. (a) minus (b).
d. Preceding balance minus (c).
*Rounded by $0.02.
ILLUSTRATION GAAP21.3 Lease Amortization Schedule
Parker computes straight-line expense and amortization on its right-of-use asset
for each year of the lease, as presented in Illustration GAAP21.4.

--- Page 2014 ---
Parker Shipping Co.
Lease Expense Schedule
Date
(A)
Lease Expense 
(Straight-Line)
(B)
Interest
(8%) on 
Liability
(C)
Amortization of
ROU Asset 
(A − B)
(D)
Carrying Value of
ROU Asset 
(D − C)
12/31/21
$34,119.76
12/31/22
$ 9,538.39 $1,966.51
$ 7,571.88
26,547.88
12/31/23
9,538.39
1,360.76
8,177.63
18,370.25
12/31/24
9,538.39
706.53
8,831.86
9,538.39
12/31/25
9,538.39
9,538.39
0.00
$38,153.56 $4,033.80
$34,119.76
ILLUSTRATION GAAP21.4 Lease Expense Schedule
As indicated, the annual lease expense equals interest related to amortizing its
lease liability plus amortization of the right-of-use asset. Parker decreases the
right-of-use asset’s book value each year by an amount (a plug) such that total
annual lease expense is $9,538.39. The journal entries by Parker over the first 2
years of the lease are presented in Illustration GAAP21.5.

--- Page 2015 ---
ILLUSTRATION GAAP21.5 Lessee Operating Lease Entries
After the entry for the final payment on December 31, 2025, the lease liability and
right-of-use asset are fully amortized. The lease expense for the 4 years
($38,153.56) is comprised of amortization of the right-of-use asset of $34,119.76
plus interest associated with the amortization of the lease liability of $4,033.80.
Parker combines interest on the liability and amortization of the right-of-use asset
to report lease expense on the income statement over the life of the lease.
GAAP Self-Test Questions

--- Page 2016 ---
1. Which of the following is not true with respect to lease accounting under U.S.
GAAP?
a. U.S. GAAP requires lessees to recognize a right-of-use asset and related lease
liability for leases with terms longer than one year.
b. U.S. GAAP has similar lease disclosure requirements as IFRS.
c. U.S. GAAP permits recognition of selling profit on direct financing leases at
lease commencement.
d. IFRS uses essentially the same lessor accounting model as U.S. GAAP for
leases classified as sales-type or operating.
2. Under U.S. GAAP:
a. lessees and lessors recognize right-of-use assets.
b. lessees always use the operating method.
c. lessees always recognize a right-of-use asset and lease liability for leases with
terms less than one year.
d. lessors distinguish between sales-type and direct financing leases.
3. All of the following are similarities with respect to the accounting for leases
under IFRS and U.S. GAAP except:
a. lessees recognize a right-of-use asset and related lease liability for leases with
terms longer than one year.
b. lessees use the same general lease classification criteria to determine whether
lessees classify leases as finance or operating.
c. lessors use the same model to account for sales-type leases.
d. U.S. GAAP and IFRS have similar qualitative and quantitative disclosure
requirements for lessees and lessors.
4. Under U.S. GAAP:
a. lessees may not use alternative measurement bases (e.g., revaluation
accounting) for the right-of-use asset.
b. different measurement bases may be used for the right-of-use asset but only
for leases with terms less than one year.
c. the same guidance on collectibility of the lease payments is used by lessors as
in IFRS.
d. lessors are required to defer gross profit on sales-type leases.

--- Page 2017 ---
5. All of the following are differences with respect to the accounting for leases
under IFRS and U.S. GAAP except:
a. IFRS has an additional lessee recognition and measurement exemption for
leases of assets of low value (U.S. GAAP does not).
b. IFRS allows alternative measurement bases for the right-of-use asset (e.g.,
the revaluation model).
c. under IFRS, lessees use the same tests to determine whether a lease should
be classified as finance or operating.
d. IFRS permits recognition of selling profit on direct financing leases at lease
commencement.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP21.1 Where can authoritative U.S. GAAP related to the accounting for
leases be found?
GAAP21.2 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S.
GAAP and IFRS with respect to the accounting for leases.
GAAP21.3 LeBron James (LBJ) Corporation agrees on January 1, 2022, to lease
equipment from Cavaliers, Inc. for 3 years. The lease calls for annual lease
payments of $23,000 at the beginning of each year. The lease does not transfer
ownership nor does it contain a bargain purchase option, and it is not a specialized
asset. In addition, the useful life of the equipment is 10 years, and the present
value of the lease payments is less than 90% of the fair value of the equipment.
Prepare LBJ’s journal entries on January 1, 2022 (commencement of the
operating lease), and on December 31, 2022. Assume the implicit rate used by the
lessor is unknown, and LBJ’s incremental borrowing rate is 6%.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. d 3. b 4. a 5. c
Notes
1 The IASB believes that the reporting of an asset and liability for a lease
arrangement is consistent with its conceptual framework’s definition of assets
and liabilities. That is, assets are resources controlled by the entity as a result
of past events and from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to
the entity. Liabilities are present obligations of the entity arising from past
events, the settlement of which is expected to result in an outflow of assets
from the entity. [2]

--- Page 2018 ---
2 In contrast to the single finance lease method under IFRS, the FASB adopted a
dual-lease model, under which some leases—those which convey right-of-use
but not ownership—would have a straight-line expense pattern, while others
would be accounted for as a financing. The IASB adopted the single lease
approach, reasoning that most users of financial statements believe that all
leases create assets and “debt-like” liabilities for a lessee. Consequently, they
benefit from lessees recognizing interest on those liabilities, which enables
them to perform meaningful ratio analyses. In addition, the finance lease
model is easy to understand, which reduces cost and complexity by removing
the need for systems that can deal with two lessee accounting approaches. [3]
3 As discussed more fully in a later section of the chapter, the amount of the right-
of-use asset is adjusted for prepaid rent, lease incentives received from the
lessor, and any initial direct costs.
4 Reasonably certain is a high threshold of probability. The IASB intended that
parties to a lease should account for options only when the lessee has a
compelling economic reason to exercise a purchase, renewal, or termination
option. [4]
5 This difficulty arises because, for example, the lessee may not know the residual
value used by the lessor, nor the initial direct costs that the lessor incurs.
6 As discussed in more detail later in the chapter, if the lease contains a bargain
purchase option, such that it is reasonably certain that the lessee will purchase
the asset at the end of the lease, the lessee depreciates the right-of-use asset
over the economic life of the asset.
7 The computation of the present value is rounded by €0.02. The rounding occurs
because the tables from Chapter 6 are used to determine the amounts shown.
For homework and other computations in the text, we use the tables, which
may to lead to small rounding differences. In practice, a financial calculator is
often used to avoid these rounding differences.
8 Later in the chapter, we provide an expanded discussion of the relationship
between the expected residual value and the guaranteed residual value, and its
effect on the measurement of the lease liability. Also, note that the term of the
lease is equal to the useful life of the asset, and the present value of the lease
payments is nearly 96 percent of the fair value of the underlying asset, such
that Ivanhoe (the lessee) takes ownership or consumes the substantial portion
of the underlying asset over the lease term.
9 If Ivanhoe had not known CNH’s implicit rate, it would have used its
incremental borrowing rate of 5 percent to compute the present value of the
lease liability.

--- Page 2019 ---
10 As discussed, in measuring the liability and right-of-use asset, Ivanhoe does
not include the present value of the residual value because the guaranteed
amount is not greater than the expected amount.
11 Because it occurs at the lease commencement date, the first payment does not
contain an interest component.
12 If Ivanhoe purchases the backhoe during the term of the lease, it accounts for
the transaction as a termination of the lease and a purchase of an asset. Thus, it
would record any difference between the purchase price and the carrying
amount of the lease liability as an adjustment of the carrying amount of the
asset.
13 Adapted from PricewaterhouseCoopers, Leases—2016 (www.pwc.com),
Chapter 4.
14 The IASB concluded that by meeting any of the lease classification tests in
Illustration 21.18, the lessor transfers control (ownership) of the leased asset
and therefore satisfies a performance obligation, which is required for revenue
recognition under the IASB’s recent standard on revenue. Although not part of
the classification tests, the lessor must also determine whether the
collectibility of payments from the lessee is probable. If payments are not
probable, the lessor does not record a receivable and does not derecognize the
leased asset. Instead, receipt of any lease payments is recorded as a deposit
liability. [11]
15 As discussed earlier, if a lease contains a renewal option that is a bargain (i.e.,
difference between the renewal rental and the expected fair rental is great
enough to make exercise of the option to renew reasonably certain), the lessor
should include bargain renewal periods in the lease term.
16 The transfer of ownership, the bargain purchase option, and the alternative use
test essentially give ownership of the leased asset to the lessee. The other two
tests give control of a substantial portion of the underlying asset to the lessee,
and in some cases, essentially ownership.
17 Lease Receivable is often defined as only the present value of the rental
payments plus the present value of the guaranteed residual value. In the case in
which the lessor has an unguaranteed residual value, the total amount is often
referred to as the net investment in the lease. Another approach is to report the
unguaranteed residual value separately when making the journal entry. We use
the definition in Illustration 21.19 for pedagogical reasons; this definition
(including both guaranteed and unguaranteed residual values) should be used
in the homework.

--- Page 2020 ---
18 For a lease classified as operating, if collectibility is not probable, recognition of
lease income is limited to cash received.
19 If the CNH/Ivanhoe lease were a lease with no selling profit (the cost of the
backhoe is equal to the fair value), the entry at commencement would be as
follows.
Lease Receivable 100,000
Equipment
100,000
That is, the backhoe is not part of inventory, and the lease is a financing
arrangement (a direct financing lease).
20 Adapted from PricewaterhouseCoopers, Leases—2016 (www.pwc.com), p. 4-4.
21 Pepa Kraft, “Rating Agency Adjustment to GAAP Financial Statements and
Their Effect on Ratings and Credit Spreads,” The Accounting Review (March
2015), Vol. 90, No. 2, pp 641–674. In addition, a study by J.P. Morgan showed
significant variation in the range of analysts’ estimates of the underlying lease
obligations under the new rules. See P. Elwin and S. C. Fernandes, “Leases on
B/S from 2017? Retailers and Transport Will Be Hit Hard in Leverage Terms,”
Global Equity Research, J.P. Morgan Securities (May 17, 2013). See also M.
Maurer, “New Lease Accounting Standard May Mislead Investors, Credit Suisse
Says,” Wall Street Journal (July 10, 2019).
22 The same amortization schedule can be used for the lessee and lessor because
there is no residual value and Parker knows the implicit rate used by the lessor
is setting the payments (lessee and lessor use the same discount rate).
23 The FASB indicates that reporting a single operating cost in the income
statement more appropriately reflects the economics of an operating lease than
the separate recognition of interest and amortization used in the finance lease
approach. The rationale for this approach is that an operating lease grants
different rights to the lessee. The different rights are that in an operating lease,
the lessee is neither exposed to, nor benefits from, any value changes in the
right-of-use asset over the term of the lease.
Sources: A. Catanach and E. Ketz, “Still Searching for the ‘Rite’ Stuff,” Grumpy Old Accountants (April
30, 2012), blogs.smeal.psu.edu; Sue Lloyd, “A New Lease on Life,” Investor Perspective (January 2016); “A
Study on the Impact of Lease Capitalization: IFRS 16: The New Leases Standard,” www.pwc.com
(February 2016); and Jean Eaglesham, “Airlines Get a Break in New Accounting for Leases,” Wall Street
Journal (November 15, 2019).

--- Page 2021 ---
