CHAPTER 4
Income Statement and Related Information
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
2. Describe the content and format of the income statement.
3. Discuss how to report various income items.
4. Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
5. Describe related equity statements.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 4
As the following opening story indicates, companies are attempting to provide income
statement information they believe is useful for decision-making. Investors need
complete and comparable information on income and its components to assess
company profitability correctly. In this chapter, we examine the many different types of
revenues, expenses, gains, and losses that affect the income statement and related
information, as follows.
Financial Statements Are Changing
RPC Group plc (GBR) reported the following additional information in its most recent
annual report (in £ millions).
Operating profit based on GAAP
£355.7

--- Page 309 ---
Acquisition costs
3.9
Impairment losses
23.8
Restructuring costs
11.2
Net post-acquisition consideration and remuneration
(11.5)
Amortization of purchased intangible assets
50.7
Insurance proceeds and other
(8.8)
Adjusted operation profit
£425.0
The company indicated that it presents the adjusted operating profit, which is called an
alternative performance measure, because it believes that this additional information, which
is beyond the scope of IFRS-mandated data to be reported, helps users to better understand
the company. For example, RPC Group management uses this measure in analyzing
performance, allocating resources, budgeting, and paying employee incentives. It further
notes that this measure, although defined by IFRS, may not be directly comparable with
other companies’ profit measures. Finally, the company states that it is not intended to be a
substitute for, or superior to, IFRS measurements of profit.
Why do companies make these additional adjustments? One major reason is that companies
believe the items on the income statement are not representative of operating results. Here
is another example using Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR). At one time, M&S
reported in a separate schedule adjustments to net income for items such as strategic
programme costs, restructuring costs, and impairment charges. All these adjustments made
the adjusted income measure higher than reported income.
Skeptics of these practices note that these adjustments generally lead to higher adjusted net
income. In addition, they note that it is difficult to compare these adjusted or pro forma
numbers because one company may have a different view of to what it believes to be
fundamental to the business. In many ways, the pro forma reporting practices by companies
such as RPC and M&S represent implied criticisms of certain financial reporting standards,
including how the information is presented on the income statement.
The IASB has initiated a project on financial statement presentation to address users’
concerns about these practices. Users believe there are too many alternatives for classifying
and reporting income statement information. For example, some companies disaggregate
product costs (such as materials and labor), as well as general and administrative costs
(such as rent and utilities) in their income statements. Other companies simply report
product costs and general and administrative costs in the aggregate, which makes it difficult
to understand the nature of these costs (recurring or non-recurring, fixed or variable). The
result is that two different companies can comply with existing standards for income
statement presentation but vary considerably in the detail provided.
What is needed is a common set of principles to be followed when income statement
information is presented. The IASB’s continuing work on financial statement presentation is
progressing, with an exposure draft expected soon. See the IFRS website for more
information on the status of the project. It is hoped that this project on financial statement
presentation will provide those necessary principles.

--- Page 310 ---
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions,
are also available online.
Income Statement
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
The income statement is the report that measures the success of company operations for
a given period of time. (It is also often called the statement of income or statement of
earnings.1) The business and investment community uses the income statement to
determine profitability, investment value, and creditworthiness. It provides investors and
creditors with information that helps to predict the amounts, timing, and uncertainty
of future cash flows.
Usefulness of the Income Statement
The income statement helps users of financial statements predict future cash flows in a
number of ways. For example, investors and creditors use the income statement information
to:
1. Evaluate the past performance of the company. Examining revenues and
expenses indicates how the company performed and allows comparison to its
competitors. For example, analysts use the income data provided by Hyundai (KOR) to
compare its performance to that of Toyota (JPN).
2. Provide a basis for predicting future performance. Information about past
performance helps to determine important trends which, if they continue, provide
information about future performance. For example, General Electric (GE) (USA) at
one time reported consistent increases in revenues. Obviously, past success does not
necessarily translate into future success. However, analysts can better predict future

--- Page 311 ---
revenues, earnings, and cash flows if a reasonable correlation exists between past and
future performance.
3. Help assess the risk or uncertainty of achieving future cash flows. Information
on the various components of income—revenues, expenses, gains, and losses—
highlights the relationships among them. It also helps to assess the risk of not
achieving a particular level of cash flows in the future. For example, investors and
creditors often segregate Siemens AG’s (DEU) operating performance from
discontinued operations because Siemens primarily generates revenues and cash
through its operations. Thus, results from continuing operations have greater
significance for predicting future performance than do results from discontinued
operations.
In summary, information in the income statement—revenues, expenses, gains, and losses—
helps users evaluate past performance. It also provides insights into the likelihood of
achieving a particular level of cash flows in the future.
Limitations of the Income Statement
Because net income is an estimate and reflects a number of assumptions, income statement
users need to be aware of certain limitations associated with its information. Some of these
limitations include:

--- Page 312 ---
1. Companies omit items from the income statement that they cannot measure
reliably. Current practice prohibits recognition of certain items from the
determination of income even though the effects of these items can arguably affect the
company’s performance. For example, a company may not record in income unrealized
gains and losses on certain investment securities when there is uncertainty that it will
ever realize the changes in value. In addition, an increasing number of companies, such
as L’Oréal (FRA) and Daimler AG (DEU), experience increases in value due to brand
recognition, customer service, and product quality. A common framework for
identifying and reporting these types of values is still lacking.
2. Income numbers are affected by the accounting methods employed. One
company may depreciate its plant assets on an accelerated basis; another chooses
straight-line depreciation. Assuming all other factors are equal, the first company will
report lower income. In effect, we are comparing apples to oranges.
3. Income measurement involves judgment. For example, one company in good faith
may estimate the useful life of an asset to be 20 years while another company uses a 15-
year estimate for the same type of asset. Similarly, some companies may make
optimistic estimates of future warranty costs and bad debt expenses, which result in
lower expense and higher income.

--- Page 313 ---
In summary, several limitations of the income statement reduce the usefulness of its
information for predicting the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
Quality of Earnings
Our discussion so far has highlighted the importance of information in the income
statement for investment and credit decisions, including the evaluation of the company and
its managers.2 Companies try to meet or beat market expectations so that the market price
of their shares and the value of management’s compensation increase. As a result,
companies have incentives to manage income to meet earnings targets or to make earnings
look less risky.
Regulators have expressed concern that the motivations to meet earnings targets may
override good business practices. This erodes the quality of earnings and the quality of
financial reporting. As a former regulator noted, “Managing may be giving way to
manipulation; integrity may be losing out to illusion.”3
What is earnings management? It is often defined as the planned timing of revenues,
expenses, gains, and losses to smooth out bumps in earnings. In most cases, companies use
earnings management to increase income in the current year at the expense of income in
future years. For example, they prematurely recognize sales in order to boost earnings. As
one commentator noted, “… it’s like popping a cork in [opening] a bottle of wine before it is
ready.”
Companies also use earnings management to decrease current earnings in order to increase
income in the future. The classic case is the use of “cookie jar” reserves. Companies
establish these reserves by using unrealistic assumptions to estimate liabilities for such
items as environmental liabilities, restructuring charges, and warranty returns. The
companies then reduce these reserves to increase reported income in the future.
Such earnings management negatively affects the quality of earnings if it distorts the
information in a way that is less useful for predicting future earnings and cash flows.
Markets rely on trust. The bond between shareholders and the company must remain
strong. Investors or others losing faith in the numbers reported in the financial statements
will damage capital markets.

--- Page 314 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Four: The Loneliest Number
Managing earnings up or down adversely affects the quality of earnings. Why do
companies engage in such practices? Research concludes that many companies tweak
quarterly earnings to meet investor expectations. How do they do it? Research findings
indicate that companies tend to nudge their earnings numbers up by a 10th of a cent or
two. That lets them round results up to the highest cent, as illustrated in the following
chart.
What the research shows is that the number “4” appeared less often in the 10th’s place
than any other digit and significantly less often than would be expected by chance. This
effect is called “quadrophobia.” For the typical company in the study, an increase of
$31,000 in quarterly net income would boost earnings per share by a 10th of a cent. A
more recent analysis of quarterly results for more than 2,600 companies found that
rounding up remains more common than rounding down.
Another recent study reinforces the concerns about earnings management. Based on a
survey of 169 public-company chief financial officers (and with in-depth interviews of
12), the study concludes that high-quality earnings are sustainable when backed by
actual cash flows and when they avoid “unreliable long-term estimates.” However,
about 20 percent of firms manage earnings to misrepresent their economic
performance. And when they do manage earnings, it could move EPS by an average of
10 percent.
Is such earnings management a problem for investors? It is if they cannot determine
the impact on earnings quality. Indeed, the surveyed CFOs “believe that it is difficult for
outside observers to unravel earnings management, especially when such earnings are
managed using subtle unobservable choices or real actions.” What’s an investor to do?
The survey authors say the CFOs “advocate paying close attention to the key managers

--- Page 315 ---
running the firm, the lack of correlation between earnings and cash flows, significant
deviations between firm and peer experience, and unusual behavior in accruals.”
Sources: S. Thurm, “For Some Firms, a Case of ‘Quadrophobia’,” Wall Street Journal (February 14, 2010); and
H. Greenberg, “CFOs Concede Earnings Are ‘Managed’,” www.cnbc.com (July 19, 2012). The study referred to is by
I. Dichev, J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “Earnings Quality: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics (2013), pp. 1–33.
Content and Format of the Income Statement
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Describe the content and format of the income statement.
Elements of the Income Statement
Net income results from revenue, expense, gain, and loss transactions. The income
statement summarizes these transactions. This method of income measurement, the
transaction approach, focuses on the income-related activities that have occurred during
the period.4 The statement can further classify income by customer, product line, or
function; by operating and non-operating; and by continuing and discontinued. The two
major elements of the income statement are as follows.
Elements of Financial Statements
Income. Income is increases in assets, or decreases in liabilities, that result in
increases in equity, other than those relating to contributions from holders of equity
claims.
Expenses. Expenses are decreases in assets, or increases in liabilities, that result in
decreases in equity, other than those relating to distributions to holders of equity
claims. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References Section near the end of the
chapter.)
The definition of income includes both revenues and gains. Revenues arise from the
ordinary activities of a company and take many forms, such as sales, fees, interest,
dividends, and rents. Gains represent other items that meet the definition of income and
may or may not arise in the ordinary activities of a company. Gains include, for example,
gains on the sale of long-term assets or unrealized gains on trading securities.
The definition of expenses includes both expenses and losses. Expenses generally arise from
the ordinary activities of a company and take many forms, such as cost of goods sold,
depreciation, rent, salaries and wages, and taxes. Losses represent other items that meet the
definition of expenses and may or may not arise in the ordinary activities of a company.
Losses include losses on restructuring charges, losses related to sale of long-term assets, or
unrealized losses on trading securities.5
When gains and losses are reported on an income statement, they are generally separately
disclosed because knowledge of them is useful for assessing future cash flows. For example,

--- Page 316 ---
when Goody’s Burger House (GRC) sells a hamburger, it records the selling price as
revenue. However, when Goody’s Burger House sells land, it records any excess of the
selling price over the book value as a gain. This difference in treatment results because the
sale of the hamburger is part of Goody’s Burger House’s regular operations. The sale of land
is not.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of reporting these elements. Most decision-
makers find the parts of a financial statement to be more useful than the whole. As we
indicated earlier, investors and creditors are interested in predicting the amounts, timing,
and uncertainty of future income and cash flows. Having income statement elements shown
in some detail and in comparison with prior years’ data allows decision-makers to better
assess future income and cash flows.6
Intermediate Components of the Income Statement
Companies generally present some or all of the following sections and totals within the
income statement, as shown in Illustration 4.1. [2]

--- Page 317 ---
1.
Sales or Revenue Section. Presents sales, discounts, allowances, returns, and other
related information. Its purpose is to arrive at the net amount of sales revenue.
2.
Cost of Goods Sold Section. Shows the cost of goods sold to produce the sales.
 
Gross Profit. Revenue less cost of goods sold.
3.
Selling Expenses. Reports expenses resulting from the company’s efforts to make
sales.
4.
Administrative or General Expenses. Reports expenses of general administration.
5.
Other Income and Expense. Includes most other transactions that do not fit into
the revenues and expenses categories provided above. Items such as gains and losses
on sales of long-lived assets, impairments of assets, and restructuring charges are
reported in this section. In addition, revenues such as rent revenue, dividend revenue,
and interest revenue are often reported.
 
Income from Operations. Company’s results from normal operations.
6.
Financing Costs. A separate item that identifies the financing cost of the company,
hereafter referred to as interest expense.
 
Income before Income Tax. The total income before income tax.
7.
Income Tax. A short section reporting taxes levied on income before income tax.
 
Income from Continuing Operations. A company’s results before any gain or loss
on discontinued operations. If the company does not have any gain or loss on
discontinued operations, this section is not reported and this amount is reported as net
income.
8.
Discontinued Operations. Gains or losses resulting from the disposition of a
component of a company.
 
Net Income. The net results of the company’s performance over a period of time.
9.
Non-Controlling Interest. Presents an allocation of net income to the controlling
shareholders and to the non-controlling interest.
10. Earnings per Share. Per share amounts that are reported.
ILLUSTRATION 4.1 Income Statement Format
Illustration 4.2 presents an income statement for Boc Hong Company. Boc Hong’s income
statement includes all of the major items in the list above, except for discontinued
operations. In arriving at net income, the statement presents the following subtotals and
totals: gross profit, income from operations, income before income tax, and net income.

--- Page 318 ---
Boc Hong Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales
 
 
 
Sales revenue
 
 
$3,053,081
Less: Sales discounts
 
$ 24,241  
Sales returns and allowances
 
56,427
80,668
Net sales
 
 
2,972,413
Cost of goods sold
 
 
1,982,541
Gross profit
 
 
989,872
Selling expenses
 
 
 
Sales salaries and commissions
$202,644  
 
Sales office salaries
59,200  
 
Travel and entertainment
48,940  
 
Advertising expense
38,315  
 
Delivery expense
41,209  
 
Shipping supplies and expense
24,712  
 
Postage and stationery
16,788  
 
Telephone and Internet expense
12,215  
 
Depreciation of sales equipment
9,005
453,028  
Administrative expenses
 
 
 
Officers’ salaries
186,000  
 
Office salaries
61,200  
 
Legal and professional services
23,721  
 
Utilities expense
23,275  
 
Insurance expense
17,029  
 
Depreciation of building
18,059  
 
Depreciation of office equipment
16,000  
 
Stationery, supplies, and postage
2,875  
 
Miscellaneous office expenses
2,612
350,771
803,799
Other income and expense
 
 
 
Dividend revenue
 
98,500  
Rent revenue
 
42,910  
Gain on sale of plant assets
 
30,000
171,410
Income from operations
 
 
357,483
Interest on bonds and notes
 
 
126,060
Income before income tax
 
 
231,423
Income tax
 
 
66,934

--- Page 319 ---
Net income for the year
 
 
$ 164,489
Attributable to:
 
 
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong
 
 
$ 120,000
Non-controlling interest
 
 
44,489
Earnings per share
 
 
$1.74
ILLUSTRATION 4.2 Income Statement
Condensed Income Statements
In some cases, an income statement cannot possibly present all the desired expense detail.
To solve this problem, a company includes only the totals of components in the statement of
income. It then also prepares supplementary schedules to support the totals. This format
may reduce the income statement itself to a few lines on a single sheet. For this reason,
readers who wish to study all the reported data on operations must give their attention to
the supporting schedules.
For example, consider the income statement shown in Illustration 4.3 for Boc Hong
Company. This statement is a condensed version of the more detailed income statement
presented in Illustration 4.2. It is more representative of the type found in practice.
Illustration 4.4 shows an example of a supporting schedule, cross-referenced as Note D
and detailing the selling expenses.
Boc Hong Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net sales
 
$2,972,413
Cost of goods sold
 
1,982,541
Gross profit
 
989,872
Selling expenses (see Note D) $453,028  
Administrative expenses
350,771
803,799
Other income and expense
 
171,410
Income from operations
 
357,483
Interest expense
 
126,060
Income before income tax
 
231,423
Income tax
 
66,934
Net income for the year
 
$ 164,489
Attributable to:
 
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong
 
$ 120,000
Non-controlling interest
 
44,489
Earnings per share
 
$ 1.74
ILLUSTRATION 4.3 Condensed Income Statement

--- Page 320 ---
Note D: Selling expenses
 
Sales salaries and commissions
$202,644
Sales office salaries
59,200
Travel and entertainment
48,940
Advertising expense
38,315
Delivery expense
41,209
Shipping supplies and expense
24,712
Postage and stationery
16,788
Telephone and Internet expense
12,215
Depreciation of sales equipment
9,005
Total selling expenses
$453,028
ILLUSTRATION 4.4 Sample Supporting Schedule
How much detail should a company include in the income statement? On the one hand, a
company wants to present a simple, summarized statement so that readers can readily
discover important factors. On the other hand, it wants to disclose the results of all activities
and to provide more than just a skeleton report. As a result, the income statement always
includes certain basic elements, but companies can present them in various formats.

--- Page 321 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
You May Need a Map
Many companies (like RPC Group in the opening story) promote their performance
through the reporting of various “alternative” performance measures. The basic
approach is to adjust a number such as operating income by adding back both non-
recurring expenses and losses, and also expenses that are recurring but are not viewed
by management as useful in understanding the performance of the business. This
commonly results in a performance measure that is substantially better than the
traditional IFRS-based measures. This difference led one accounting regulator to quip
that these alternative measures should be called EBS—“Everything but Bad Stuff.”
According to the IASB, “there has been an increasing trend for companies to emphasise
‘adjusted’ earnings—known as non-IFRS earnings—which can paint a misleading
picture of their true financial situations.” Indeed, U.S. public companies are required to
reconcile non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to U.S. GAAP, thereby giving investors a
roadmap to analyze the adjustments companies make to their U.S. GAAP numbers to
arrive at pro forma results.
Recently, WeWork (USA) came under intense scrutiny as it prepared for its initial
public offering. The shared work space provider has for a number of years reported
significant losses using U.S. GAAP measures. But its own alternative performance
measure, called “community adjusted EBITDA,” has shown a different outcome. For
example in a recent year when the company reported a $931 million operating loss, it
also reported that community adjusted EBITDA for the same period showed a profit of
$231 million. Quite a difference!
In order to assist users of financial statements, companies that include these alternative
performance measures have begun to publish notes and even full guides to explain the
measures and how they are computed. For example, Vodafone Group plc (GBR)
included a significant number of pages in its most recent annual report to provide an
explanation for its alternative performance measures reported. Similarly, Nestlé (CHE)
now publishes annually a separate alternative performance measures guide to explain
the 14 different alternative performance measures the company uses.
Finding the right balance between allowing a company to tell its own story, including
both IFRS-based performance measures and alternative measures that the company has
created, has drawn significant attention from regulators around the world. The U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) only allows companies to, in essence,
report the alternative measures less prominently than the U.S. GAAP measures.
Furthermore, the alternative measures must be reconciled to U.S. GAAP measures. The
U.K. Financial Reporting Council has also examined alternative performance measures
reported by companies under its authority. It reported 10 different concerns, including
that many alternative performance measures were given greater prominence in the
financial reports and that many lacked explanation about why items had been excluded
from adjusted profit measures.
Sources: L. Turner, “Remarks to the 39th Annual Corporate Counsel Institute,” U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (October 12, 2000); H. Hoogervorst, “Performance Reporting and the Pitfalls of Non-GAAP Metrics,”
speech given at the Annual Conference of the European Accounting Association (May 11, 2016). See also SEC
Regulation G, “Conditions for Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” Release No. 33–8176 (March 28, 2003);

--- Page 322 ---
and “Corporate Reporting Thematic Review: Alternative Performance Measures,” Financial Reporting Council
(November 2017).
Reporting Various Income Items
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Discuss how to report various income items.
Gross Profit
Boc Hong Company’s gross profit is computed by deducting cost of goods sold from net
sales. The disclosure of net sales is useful because Boc Hong reports regular sales revenue as
a separate item. It discloses unusual or incidental revenues in other income and expense. As
a result, analysts can more easily understand and assess trends in revenue from continuing
operations.
Similarly, the reporting of gross profit provides a useful number for evaluating performance
and predicting future earnings. Statement readers may study the trend in gross profits to
understand how competitive pressure affected profit margins.
Income from Operations
Boc Hong Company determines income from operations by deducting selling and
administrative expense as well as other income and expense from gross profit. Income from
operations highlights items that affect regular business activities. As such, it is a metric
often used by analysts in helping to predict the amount, timing, and uncertainty of future
cash flows.
Expense Classification
Companies are required to present an analysis of expenses classified either by their nature
(such as cost of materials used, direct labor incurred, delivery expense, advertising expense,
employee benefits, depreciation expense, and amortization expense) or their function (such
as cost of goods sold, selling expenses, and administrative expenses).
An advantage of the nature-of-expense method is that it is simple to apply because
allocations of expense to different functions are not necessary. For manufacturing
companies that must allocate costs to the product produced, using a nature-of-expense
approach permits companies to report expenses without making arbitrary allocations.
The function-of-expense method, however, is often viewed as more relevant because
this method identifies the major cost drivers of the company and therefore helps users
assess whether these amounts are appropriate for the revenue generated. As indicated, a
disadvantage of this method is that the allocation of costs to the varying functions may be
arbitrary and therefore the expense classification becomes misleading.
To illustrate these two methods, assume that the accounting firm of Telaris Group performs
audit, tax, and consulting services. It has the following revenues and expenses.
Service revenues
€400,000

--- Page 323 ---
Cost of services
 
Staff salaries (related to various services performed)
145,000
Supplies expense (related to various services performed)
10,000
Selling expenses
 
Advertising costs
20,000
Entertainment expense
3,000
Administrative expenses
 
Utilities expense
5,000
Depreciation on building
12,000
If Telaris Group uses the nature-of-expense approach, its income statement presents each
expense item but does not classify the expenses into various subtotals. This approach is
shown in Illustration 4.5.
Telaris Group
Income Statement
For the Month of January 2022
Service revenues
€400,000
Staff salaries
145,000
Supplies expense
10,000
Advertising costs
20,000
Utilities expense
5,000
Depreciation on building
12,000
Entertainment expense
3,000
Net income
€205,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.5 Nature-of-Expense Approach
If Telaris uses the function-of-expense approach, its income statement is presented as
shown in Illustration 4.6.
Telaris Group
Income Statement
For the Month of January 2022
Service revenues
€400,000
Cost of services
155,000
Selling expenses
23,000
Administrative expenses
17,000
Net income
€205,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.6 Function-of-Expense Approach
The function-of-expense method is generally used in practice, although many companies
believe both approaches have merit. These companies use the function-of-expense approach

--- Page 324 ---
on the income statement but provide detail of the expenses (as in the nature-of-expense
approach) in the notes to the financial statements. For example, Boc Hong’s condensed
income statement, shown in Illustrations 4.3 and 4.4, indicates how this information might
be reported.7 For homework purposes, use the function-of-expense approach shown in the
Boc Hong example in Illustration 4.3, unless directed otherwise.
Gains and Losses
What should be included in net income is controversial. For example, should companies
report gains and losses, and corrections of revenues and expenses of prior years, as part of
retained earnings? Or, should companies first present them in the income statement and
then carry them to retained earnings?
This issue is extremely important because the number and magnitude of these items are
substantial. For example, Illustration 4.7 identifies the most common types and number
of gains and losses reported in a survey of 500 large companies. Notice that more than 40
percent of the surveyed firms reported restructuring charges, which often contain write-offs
and other one-time items. A survey of 200 IFRS adopters indicates that about 27 percent of
the surveyed firms reported a discontinued operation charge.8
ILLUSTRATION 4.7 Number of Unusual Items Reported in a Recent Year by
500 Large Companies
As our opening story discusses, we need consistent and comparable income reporting
practices to avoid “promotional” information reported by companies. Developing a
framework for reporting these gains and losses is important to ensure reliable income
information.9 Some users argue that the most useful income measure reflects only regular
and recurring revenue and expense elements. Unusual, non-recurring items do not reflect a
company’s future earning power.
In contrast, others warn that a focus on income that excludes these items potentially misses
important information about a company’s performance. Any gain or loss experienced by the
company, whether directly or indirectly related to operations, contributes to its long-run
profitability. As one analyst notes, “write-offs matter.… They speak to the volatility of past
earnings.”10
In general, the IASB takes the position that both revenues and expenses and
other income and expense should be reported as part of income from

--- Page 325 ---
operations. For example, it would be inappropriate to exclude items clearly related to
operations (such as inventory write-downs and restructuring and relocation expenses)
because they occur irregularly or infrequently, or are unusual in amount. Similarly, it would
be inappropriate to exclude items on the grounds that they do not involve cash flows, such
as depreciation and amortization expenses. However, companies can provide
additional line items, headings, and subtotals when such presentation is
relevant to an understanding of the entity’s financial performance.
IFRS indicates additional items that may need disclosure on the income statement to help
users predict the amount, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. Examples of these
unusual items are as follows.
Losses on write-downs of inventories to net realizable value or of property, plant, and
equipment to recoverable amount, as well as reversals of such write-downs.
Losses on restructurings of the activities of a company and reversals of any provisions
for the costs of restructuring.
Gains or losses on the disposal of items of property, plant, and equipment, or
investments.
Litigation settlements.
Other reversals of liabilities.
Most companies therefore report these items as part of operations and disclose them in
great detail if material in amount. Some, for example, simply show each item as a separate
item on the income statement before income from operations. Other companies use the
caption Other income and expense and then itemize them in this section or in the notes
to the financial statements. For homework purposes, itemize gains, losses, revenues, and
expenses that are not reported as part of the revenue and expense sections of the income
statement in the “Other income and expense” section.
Income Before Income Tax
Boc Hong computes income before income tax by deducting interest expense (often referred
to as financing costs) from income from operations. Under IFRS, companies must report
their financing costs on the income statement. The reason for this requirement is to
differentiate between a company’s business activities (how it uses capital to create value)
and its financing activities (how it obtains capital).
In most cases, the financing costs involve interest expense. In other situations, companies
offset items, such as interest expense, against interest revenue. Illustration 4.8 indicates
how Network Rail (GBR) presents its financing costs involving only interest expense.
As indicated, some companies offset interest revenue and interest expense, and identify it as
either finance costs or interest expense and interest revenue, net. For homework purposes,
consider only interest expense as financing costs. Interest revenue (income) should be
reported as part of “Other income and expense.”

--- Page 326 ---
Network Rail
On its income statement:
(in millions)
Finance costs
Note 9
£2,200
Note 9 Finance costs
Interest on bank loans and overdrafts
£
8
Interest on loan issued by Department of Transport
674
Interest on bonds issued under the Debt Issuance Programme
1,148
Interest on derivative instruments
232
Defined benefit pension interest cost
55
Debt Issuance Programme financial indemnity fee
266
Other interest
Total borrowing costs
2,383
Less: capitalised interest
(183)
Total finance costs
£2,200
Borrowing costs are included in the costs of qualifying assets to the extent that the asset is
financed by the group. The average rate used during the year was 3.7 per cent.
ILLUSTRATION 4.8 Presentation of Finance Costs
Net Income
Boc Hong deducts income tax from income before income tax to arrive at net income. Net
income represents the income after all revenues and expenses for the period are considered.
It is viewed by many as the most important measure of a company’s success or failure for a
given period of time.
Income tax is reported on the income statement right before net income because this
expense cannot be computed until all revenues and expenses are determined. In practice, an
understanding of how the company arrived at the income tax for the period is important. For
example, some of the revenue items may have different tax rates associated with them. In
other cases, expense items may not be deductible for income tax purposes. Understanding
these situations enables users to better predict what the future holds for the company. As a
result, there is often extensive disclosure related to how the number for income tax expense
is determined. Chapter 19 discusses this subject in detail.
Earnings per Share
A company customarily sums up the results of its operations in one important figure: net
income. However, the financial world has widely accepted an even more distilled figure as
the most significant business indicator—earnings per share (EPS).

--- Page 327 ---
The computation of earnings per share is usually straightforward. Earnings per share is
net income minus preference dividends (income available to ordinary
shareholders), divided by the weighted average of ordinary shares outstanding.11
To illustrate, assume that Lancer, Inc. reports net income of $350,000. It declares and pays
preference dividends of $50,000 for the year. The weighted-average number of ordinary
shares outstanding during the year is 100,000 shares. Lancer computes earnings per share
of $3, as shown in Illustration 4.9.
= Earnings per Share
= $3
ILLUSTRATION 4.9 Equation Illustrating Computation of Earnings per Share
Note that EPS measures the number of dollars earned by each ordinary share. It does not
represent the dollar amount paid to shareholders in the form of dividends.
Prospectuses, proxy material, and annual reports to shareholders commonly use the “net
income per share” or “earnings per share” ratio. The financial press and securities analysts
also highlight EPS. Because of its importance, companies must disclose earnings per
share on the face of the income statement.
Many companies have simple capital structures that include only ordinary shares. For these
companies, a presentation such as “Earnings per share” is appropriate on the income
statement. In many instances, however, companies’ earnings per share are subject to
dilution (reduction) in the future because existing contingencies permit the issuance of
additional shares.12[3]
In summary, the simplicity and availability of EPS figures lead to their widespread use.
Because of the importance that the public, even the well-informed public, attaches to
earnings per share, companies must make the EPS figure as meaningful as possible.
Discontinued Operations
As discussed previously, one of the most common types of unusual items is discontinued
operations. The IASB defines a discontinued operation as a component of an entity that
either has been disposed of, or is classified as held-for-sale, and:
1. Represents a major line of business or geographical area of operations, or
2. Is part of a single, coordinated plan to dispose of a major line of business or
geographical area of operations, or
3. Is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resell. [4]
To illustrate a component, Unilever plc (GBR) manufactures and sells consumer
products. It has several product groups, each with different product lines and brands. For
Unilever, a product group is the lowest level at which it can clearly distinguish the
operations and cash flows from the rest of the company’s operations. Therefore, each
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Weighted Average of Ordinary Shares Outstanding
$350,000 −$50,000
100,000

--- Page 328 ---
product group is a component of the company. If a component were disposed of, Unilever
would classify it as a discontinued operation.
Here is another example. Assume that Softso Inc. has experienced losses with certain brands
in its beauty-care products group. As a result, Softso decides to sell that part of its business.
It will discontinue any continuing involvement in the product group after the sale. In this
case, Softso eliminates the operations and the cash flows of the product group from its
ongoing operations, and reports it as a discontinued operation.
On the other hand, assume Softso decides to remain in the beauty-care business but will
discontinue the brands that experienced losses. Because Softso cannot differentiate the cash
flows from the brands from the cash flows of the product group as a whole, it cannot
consider the brands a component. Softso does not classify any gain or loss on the sale of the
brands as a discontinued operation.
Companies report as discontinued operations (in a separate income statement category) the
gain or loss from disposal of a component of a business. In addition, companies report
the results of operations of a component that has been or will be disposed of
separately from continuing operations. Companies show the effects of discontinued
operations net of tax as a separate category, after continuing operations.
To illustrate, Multiplex Products, a highly diversified company, decides to discontinue its
electronics division. During the current year, the electronics division lost £300,000 (net of
tax). Multiplex sold the division at the end of the year at a loss of £500,000 (net of tax).
Illustration 4.10 shows the reporting of discontinued operations for Multiplex.
Income from continuing operations
 
£20,000,000
Discontinued operations
 
 
Loss from operation of discontinued electronics division (net of
tax)
£300,000
 
Loss from disposal of electronics division (net of tax)
500,000
(800,000)
Net income
 
£19,200,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.10 Income Statement Presentation of Discontinued
Operations
Companies use the phrase “Income from continuing operations” only when gains or
losses on discontinued operations occur.13
A company that reports a discontinued operation must report per share amounts for the line
item either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to the financial statements.
[5] To illustrate, consider the income statement for Poquito Industries SA, shown in
Illustration 4.11. Notice the order in which Poquito shows the data, with per share
information at the bottom. Assume that the company had 100,000 shares outstanding for
the entire year. The Poquito income statement, as Illustration 4.11 shows, is highly
condensed. Poquito would need to describe items such as “Other income and expense” and
“Discontinued operations” fully and appropriately in the statement or related notes.

--- Page 329 ---
Poquito Industries SA
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
 
R$1,420,000
Cost of goods sold
 
600,000
Gross profit
 
820,000
Selling and administrative expenses
 
320,000
Other income and expense
 
 
Interest revenue
R$ 10,000  
Loss on disposal of part of Textile Division
5,000  
Loss on sale of investments
30,000
(25,000)
Income from operations
 
475,000
Interest expense
 
15,000
Income before income tax
 
460,000
Income tax
 
184,000
Income from continuing operations
 
276,000
Discontinued operations
 
 
Income from operations of Pizza Division, less applicable
income tax of R$24,800
54,000
 
Loss on disposal of Pizza Division, less applicable income tax
savings of R$41,000
90,000
(36,000)
Net income
 
R$240,000
Per share
 
 
Income from continuing operations
 
R$2.76
Income from operations of discontinued division, net of tax
 
0.54
Loss on disposal of discontinued operation, net of tax
 
0.90
Net income
 
R$2.40
ILLUSTRATION 4.11 Income Statement
Intraperiod Tax Allocation
Companies report discontinued operations on the income statement net of tax. The
allocation of tax to this item is called intraperiod tax allocation, that is, allocation within
a period. It relates the income tax expense (sometimes referred to as the income tax
provision) of the fiscal period to the specific items that give rise to the amount of the
income tax provision.
Intraperiod tax allocation helps financial statement users better understand the impact of
income taxes on the various components of net income. For example, readers of financial
statements will understand how much income tax expense relates to “income from
continuing operations.” This approach should help users to better predict the amount,
timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. In addition, intraperiod tax allocation

--- Page 330 ---
discourages statement readers from using pretax measures of performance when evaluating
financial results, and thereby recognizes that income tax expense is a real cost.
Companies use intraperiod tax allocation on the income statement for the following items:
(1) income from continuing operations and (2) discontinued operations. The general concept
is “let the tax follow the income.”
To compute the income tax expense attributable to “Income from continuing operations,” a
company would find the income tax expense related to both the revenue and expense
transactions as well as other income and expense used in determining this income subtotal.
(In this computation, the company does not consider the tax consequences of items
excluded from the determination of “Income from continuing operations.”) Companies then
associate a separate tax effect (e.g., for discontinued operations). Here, we look in more
detail at calculation of intraperiod tax allocation for discontinued gain or discontinued loss.
Discontinued Operations (Gain)
In applying the concept of intraperiod tax allocation, assume that Schindler AG has income
before income tax of €250,000. It has a gain of €100,000 from a discontinued operation.
Assuming a 30 percent income tax rate, Schindler presents the information on the income
statement, as shown in Illustration 4.12.
Income before income tax
 
€250,000
Income tax
 
75,000
Income from continuing operations  
175,000
Gain on discontinued operations
€100,000  
Less: Applicable income tax
30,000
70,000
Net income
 
€245,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.12 Intraperiod Tax Allocation, Discontinued Operations
Gain
Schindler determines the income tax of €75,000 (€250,000 × 30%) attributable to “Income
before income tax” from revenue and expense transactions related to this income. Schindler
omits the tax consequences of items excluded from the determination of “Income before
income tax.” The company shows a separate tax effect of €30,000 related to the “Gain on
discontinued operations.”
Discontinued Operations (Loss)
To illustrate the reporting of a loss from discontinued operations, assume that Schindler AG
has income before income tax of €250,000. It suffers a loss from discontinued operations of
€100,000. Assuming a 30 percent tax rate, Schindler presents the income tax on the income
statement as shown in Illustration 4.13. In this case, the loss provides a positive tax
benefit of €30,000. Schindler, therefore, subtracts it from the €100,000 loss.

--- Page 331 ---
Income before income tax
 
€250,000
Income tax
 
75,000
Income from continuing operations
 
175,000
Loss from discontinued operations
€100,000  
Less: Applicable income tax reduction
30,000
70,000
Net income
 
€105,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.13 Intraperiod Tax Allocation, Discontinued Operations
Loss
Companies may also report the tax effect of a discontinued item by means of a note
disclosure, as Illustration 4.14 shows.
Income before income tax
€250,000
Income tax
75,000
Income from continuing operations
175,000
Loss on discontinued operations, less applicable income tax reduction (Note 1)
70,000
Net income
€105,000
Note 1: During the year the Company suffered a loss on discontinuing operations of
€70,000, net of applicable income tax reduction of €30,000.
ILLUSTRATION 4.14 Note Disclosure of Intraperiod Tax Allocation
Allocation to Non-Controlling Interest
A company like Siemens (DEU) owns substantial interests in other companies. Siemens
generally consolidates the financial results of these companies into its own financial
statements. In these cases, Siemens is referred to as the parent, and the other companies are
referred to as subsidiaries. Non-controlling interest is then the portion of equity (net
assets) interest in a subsidiary not attributable to the parent company.
To illustrate, assume that Boc Hong acquires 70 percent of the outstanding shares of LTM
Group. Because Boc Hong owns more than 50 percent of LTM, it consolidates LTM’s
financial results with its own. Consolidated net income is then allocated to the controlling
(Boc Hong) and non-controlling shareholders’ percentage of ownership in LTM. In other
words, under this arrangement, the ownership of LTM is divided into two classes: (1) the
controlling interest represented by shareholders who own the majority of the shares, and (2)
the non-controlling interest represented by shareholders who are not part of the controlling
group. When Boc Hong prepares a consolidated income statement, IFRS requires that net
income be allocated to both the controlling and non-controlling interests. This allocation is
reported at the bottom of the income statement, after net income. An example of how Boc
Hong reports its non-controlling interest is shown in Illustration 4.15.

--- Page 332 ---
Net income
$164,489
Attributable to:
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong $120,000
Non-controlling interest
44,489
ILLUSTRATION 4.15 Presentation of Non-Controlling Interest
These amounts are to be presented as allocations of net income or net loss, not as an item of
income or expense.
Summary
Illustration 4.16 provides a summary of the primary income items.
As indicated, companies report all revenues, gains, expenses, and losses on the income
statement and, at the end of the period, close them to Income Summary. They provide
useful subtotals on the income statement, such as gross profit, income from operations,
income before income tax, and net income. Companies classify discontinued operations of a
component of a business as a separate item in the income statement, after “Income from
continuing operations.” Companies present other income and expense in a separate section,
before income from operations. Providing intermediate income figures helps readers
evaluate earnings information in assessing the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future
cash flows.

--- Page 333 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Different Income Concepts
The IASB is working on a project related to the presentation of financial statements. As
part of this project, it conducted field tests on two groups: preparers and users.
Preparers were asked to recast their financial statements and then comment on the
results. Users examined the recast statements and commented on their usefulness.
One part of the field test asked analysts to indicate which primary performance metric
they use or create from a company’s income statement. They were provided with the
following options: (a) Net income; (b) Pretax income; (c) Earnings before interest and
taxes (EBIT); (d) Income before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA); (e) Operating income; (f) Comprehensive income; and (g) Other. The chart
highlights their responses.
As indicated, Operating income (31%) and EBITDA (27%) were identified as the two
primary performance metrics that respondents use or create from a company’s income
statement. A majority of the respondents identified a primary performance metric that
uses net income as its foundation (pretax income would be in this group). Clearly, users
and preparers look at more than just the bottom line income number, which supports
the IFRS requirement to provide subtotals within the income statement.
In response, the IASB has been moving forward with the project and is now proposing
that additional subtotals be added to the income statement. Specifically, the current
proposal has a new subtotal called “business profit” and EBIT that would be added to
the required information in the income statement.
Source: “FASB-IASB Report on Analyst Field Test Results,” Financial Statement Presentation Informational
Board Meeting (September 21, 2009); and “Primary Financial Statements: Project Overview,” IASB (September
2018).

--- Page 334 ---
Type of
Situation
Criteria
Examples
Placement on
Income Statement
Sales or
service
revenues
Revenues arising from the
ordinary activities of the
company.
Sales revenue, service
revenue.
Sales or revenue
section.
Cost of goods
sold
Expense arising from the cost
of inventory sold or services
provided.
In a merchandising
company, Cost of
goods sold; in a
service company,
Cost of services.
Deduct from sales (to
arrive at gross profit)
or service revenue.
Selling and
administrative
expenses
Expenses arising from the
ordinary activities of the
company.
Sales salaries,
Freight-out, Rent,
Depreciation,
Utilities.
Deduct from gross
profit; if the function-
of-expense approach
is used, depreciation
and amortization
expense and labor
costs must be
disclosed.
Other income
and expense
Gains and losses and other
ancillary revenues and
expenses.
Gain on sale of long-
lived assets,
Impairment loss on
intangible assets,
Investment revenue,
Dividend and Interest
revenue, Casualty
losses.
Report as part of
income from
operations.
Financing
costs
Separates cost of financing
from operating costs.
Interest expense.
Report in a separate
section between
income from
operations and
income before income
tax.
Income tax
Levies imposed by
governmental bodies on the
basis of income.
Taxes computed on
income before
income tax.
Report in separate
section between
income before income
tax and net income.
Earnings per
share
Must be reported on the face
of the income statement.
Net income minus
preference dividends
divided by weighted
average of ordinary
shares outstanding.
Report separate EPS
for income from
continuing operations
(if applicable) and net
income.
Discontinued
operations
A component of a company
that has either been disposed
of or is classified as held-for-
sale.
A sale by a diversified
company of a major
division representing
its only activities in
the electronics
Report gains or losses
on discontinued
operations net of tax
in a separate section
between income from

--- Page 335 ---
industry.
Food distributor that
sells wholesale to
supermarkets decides
to discontinue the
division in a major
geographic area.
continuing operations
and net income.
Non-
controlling
interest
Allocation of net income or
loss divided between two
classes: (1) the majority
interest represented by the
shareholders who own the
controlling interest, and (2)
the non-controlling interest.
Net income (loss)
attributable to non-
controlling
shareholders.
Report as a separate
item below net
income or loss as an
allocation of the net
income or loss (not as
an item of income or
expense).
ILLUSTRATION 4.16 Summary of Various Income Items
Accounting Changes and Errors
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
Changes in Accounting Principle
Changes in accounting occur frequently in practice because important events or conditions
may be in dispute or uncertain at the statement date. One type of accounting change results
when a company adopts a different accounting principle. Changes in accounting
principle include a change in the method of inventory pricing from FIFO to average-cost,
or the change from an existing accounting principle to a new accounting principle (see
Underlying Concepts).14[6]
Underlying Concepts
Companies can change principles, but they must demonstrate that the newly adopted
principle is preferable to the old one. Such changes result in lost consistency from
period to period.
A company recognizes a change in accounting principle by making a retrospective
adjustment to the financial statements. Such an adjustment recasts the prior years’
statements so that they are consistent with the newly adopted principle. The company
records the cumulative effect of the change for prior periods as an adjustment to beginning
retained earnings of the earliest year presented.
To illustrate, Gaubert Inc. (which began operations in 2020) decided in March 2022 to
change from FIFO to weighted-average inventory pricing. Gaubert’s income before income
tax, using the new weighted-average method in 2022, is $30,000. Illustration 4.17
presents the pretax income data for 2020 and 2021 for this example.

--- Page 336 ---
Year
FIFO
Weighted-Average Method Excess of FIFO over Weighted-Average Method
2020 $40,000
$35,000
$5,000
2021
30,000
27,000
3,000
Total  
 
$8,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.17 Calculation of a Change in Accounting Principle
Illustration 4.18 shows the information Gaubert presented in its comparative income
statements, based on a 30 percent tax rate.
 
2022
2021
2020
Income before income tax $30,000 $27,000 $35,000
Income tax
9,000
8,100
10,500
Net income
$21,000 $18,900 $24,500
ILLUSTRATION 4.18 Income Statement Presentation of a Change in
Accounting Principle
Thus, under the retrospective approach, the company recasts the prior years’ income
numbers under the newly adopted method. This approach therefore preserves comparability
across years.
Changes in Accounting Estimates
Changes in accounting estimates are inherent in the accounting process. For example,
companies estimate useful lives and residual values of depreciable assets, uncollectible
receivables, inventory obsolescence, and the number of periods expected to benefit from a
particular expenditure. Not infrequently, due to the passage of time, circumstances, or new
information, even estimates originally made in good faith must be changed. A company
accounts for such changes prospectively, which means in the period of change if they
affect only that period, or in the period of change and future periods if the change affects
both.
To illustrate a change in estimate that affects only the period of change, assume that DuPage
Materials AG consistently estimated its bad debt expense at 1 percent of accounts receivable.
In 2022, however, DuPage determines that it must revise upward the estimate of bad debts
for the current year’s credit sales to 2 percent, or double the prior years’ percentage. The 2
percent rate is necessary to reduce accounts receivable to net realizable value. Using 2
percent results in a bad debt charge of CHF240,000, or double the amount using the 1
percent estimate for prior years. DuPage records the bad debt expense and related allowance
at December 31, 2022, as follows.
Bad Debt Expense
240,000  
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts  
240,000
DuPage includes the entire change in estimate in 2022 income because the effect of the
change does not affect future periods. Companies do not handle changes in estimate
retrospectively. That is, such changes are not carried back to adjust prior years. (We
examine changes in estimate that affect both the current and future periods in greater detail
in Chapter 22.) Changes in estimate are not considered errors.

--- Page 337 ---
Corrections of Errors
Errors occur as a result of mathematical mistakes, mistakes in the application of accounting
principles, or oversight or misuse of facts that existed at the time financial statements were
prepared. In recent years, many companies have corrected for errors in their financial
statements. The errors involved such items as improper reporting of revenue, accounting for
share options, allowances for receivables, inventories, and other provisions.
Companies correct errors by making proper entries in the accounts and reporting the
corrections in the financial statements. Corrections of errors are treated as prior period
adjustments, similar to changes in accounting principles. Companies record a correction of
an error in the year in which it is discovered. They report the error in the financial
statements as an adjustment to the beginning balance of retained earnings. If a company
prepares comparative financial statements, it should restate the prior statements for the
effects of the error.
To illustrate, in 2022, Tsang Ltd. determined that it incorrectly overstated its accounts
receivable and sales revenue by NT$100,000 in 2021. In 2022, Tsang makes the following
entry to correct for this error (ignore income taxes).
Retained Earnings
100,000  
Accounts Receivable  
100,000
Retained Earnings is debited because sales revenue, and therefore net income, was
overstated in a prior period. Accounts Receivable is credited to reduce this overstated
balance to the correct amount.
Summary
The impact of changes in accounting principle and error corrections are debited or credited
directly to retained earnings, if related to a prior period. Illustration 4.19 summarizes the
basic concepts related to these two items, as well as the accounting and reporting for
changes in estimates. Although simplified, the chart provides a useful framework for
determining the treatment of special items affecting the income statement.

--- Page 338 ---
Type of
Situation
Criteria
Examples
Placement on
Income Statement
Changes in
accounting
principle
Change from
one generally
accepted
accounting
principle to
another.
Change in the basis of inventory pricing
from FIFO to average-cost.
Recast prior years’
income statements
on the same basis as
the newly adopted
principle.
Changes in
accounting
estimates
Normal,
recurring
corrections
and
adjustments.
Changes in the realizability of receivables
and inventories; changes in estimated
lives of equipment, intangible assets;
changes in estimated liability for warranty
costs, income taxes, and salary payments.
Show change only in
the affected accounts
(not shown net of
tax) and disclose the
nature of the change.
Corrections
of errors
Mistake,
misuse of
facts.
Error in reporting income and expense.
Restate prior years’
income statements
to correct for error.
ILLUSTRATION 4.19 Summary of Accounting Changes and Errors
Related Equity Statements
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Describe related equity statements.
Retained Earnings Statement
Net income increases retained earnings. A net loss decreases retained earnings. Both cash
and share dividends decrease retained earnings. Changes in accounting principle (generally)
and prior period adjustments may increase or decrease retained earnings. Companies charge
or credit these adjustments (net of tax) to the opening balance of retained earnings.
Companies may show retained earnings information in different ways. For example, some
companies prepare a separate retained earnings statement, as Illustration 4.20 shows.

--- Page 339 ---
Choi Ltd.
Retained Earnings Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Retained earnings, January 1, as reported
 
₩1,050,000
Correction for understatement of net income in prior period
(inventory error)
 
50,000
Retained earnings, January 1, as adjusted
 
1,100,000
Add: Net income
 
360,000
 
 
1,460,000
Less: Cash dividends
₩100,000  
Share dividends
200,000
300,000
Retained earnings, December 31
 
₩1,160,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.20 Retained Earnings Statement
The reconciliation of the beginning to the ending balance in retained earnings provides
information about why net assets increased or decreased during the year. The association of
dividend distributions with net income for the period indicates what management is doing
with earnings: It may be “plowing back” into the business part or all of the earnings,
distributing all current income, or distributing current income plus the accumulated
earnings of prior years.
Restrictions of Retained Earnings
Companies often restrict retained earnings to comply with contractual requirements, board
of directors’ policy, or current necessity. Generally, companies disclose in the notes to the
financial statements the amounts of restricted retained earnings. In some cases, companies
transfer the amount of retained earnings restricted to an account titled Appropriated
Retained Earnings. The retained earnings section may therefore report two separate
amounts: (1) retained earnings free (unrestricted) and (2) retained earnings appropriated
(restricted). The total of these two amounts equals the total retained earnings.
Comprehensive Income Statement
Companies generally include in income all revenues, expenses, and gains and losses
recognized during the period. These items are classified within the income statement so that
financial statement readers can better understand the significance of various components of
net income. Changes in accounting principle and corrections of errors are excluded from the
calculation of net income because their effects relate to prior periods.
In recent years, use of fair values for measuring assets and liabilities has increased.
Furthermore, possible reporting of gains and losses related to changes in fair value has
placed a strain on income reporting. Because fair values are continually changing, some
argue that recognizing these gains and losses in net income is misleading. The IASB agrees
and has identified a limited number of transactions that should be recorded directly to
equity. One example is unrealized gains and losses on non-trading equity securities.15 These
gains and losses are excluded from net income, thereby reducing volatility in net income due

--- Page 340 ---
to fluctuations in fair value. At the same time, disclosure of the potential gain or loss is
provided.
Companies include these items that bypass the income statement in a measure called
comprehensive income. Comprehensive income includes all changes in equity during a
period except those resulting from investments by owners and distributions to owners.
Comprehensive income, therefore, includes the following: all revenues and gains, expenses
and losses reported in net income, and all gains and losses that bypass net income but affect
equity. These items—non-owner changes in equity that bypass the income statement—are
referred to as other comprehensive income.
Companies must display the components of other comprehensive income in one of two
ways: (1) a single continuous statement (one statement approach) or (2) two separate
but consecutive statements of net income and other comprehensive income (two
statement approach). The one statement approach is often referred to as the statement of
comprehensive income. The two statement approach uses the traditional term income
statement for the first statement and the comprehensive income statement for the second
statement.
Under either approach, companies display each component of net income and each
component of other comprehensive income. In addition, net income and comprehensive
income are reported. Companies are not required to report earnings per share information
related to comprehensive income.16
We illustrate these two alternatives in the next two sections. In each case, assume that Gill
SpA reports the following information for 2022: sales revenue €800,000, cost of goods sold
€600,000, operating expenses €90,000, and an unrealized holding gain on non-trading
equity securities of €30,000, net of tax.
One Statement Approach
In this approach, the traditional net income is a subtotal, with total comprehensive income
shown as a final total. The combined statement has the advantage of not requiring the
creation of a new financial statement. However, burying net income as a subtotal on the
statement is a disadvantage. Illustration 4.21 shows the one statement format for Gill
SpA.

--- Page 341 ---
Gill SpA
Statement of Comprehensive Income
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
€800,000
Cost of goods sold
600,000
Gross profit
200,000
Operating expenses
90,000
Net income
110,000
Other comprehensive income
 
Unrealized holding gain on nontrading equity securities, net of tax
30,000
Comprehensive income
€140,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.21 One Statement Format: Comprehensive Income
Two Statement Approach
Illustration 4.22 shows the two statement format for Gill. Reporting comprehensive
income in a separate statement indicates that the gains and losses identified as other
comprehensive income have the same status as traditional gains and losses.
Gill SpA
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
€800,000
Cost of goods sold
600,000
Gross profit
200,000
Operating expenses
90,000
Net income
€110,000
Gill SpA
Comprehensive Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net income
€110,000
Other comprehensive income
 
Unrealized holding gain, net of tax
30,000
Comprehensive income
€140,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.22 Two Statement Format: Comprehensive Income
Statement of Changes in Equity
In addition to a statement of comprehensive income, companies are also required to present
a statement of changes in equity. Equity is generally comprised of share capital—
ordinary, share premium—ordinary, retained earnings, and the accumulated balances in
other comprehensive income. The statement reports the change in each equity account and
in total equity for the period. The following items are disclosed in this statement.

--- Page 342 ---
1. Accumulated other comprehensive income for the period.
2. Contributions (issuances of shares) and distributions (dividends) to owners.
3. Reconciliation of the carrying amount of each component of equity from the beginning
to the end of the period.
Companies often prepare the statement of changes in equity in column form. In this format,
they use columns for each account and for total equity.
To illustrate, assume the same information for Gill SpA as shown in Illustration 4.22. The
company had the following equity account balances at the beginning of 2022: Share Capital
—Ordinary €300,000, Retained Earnings €50,000, and Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income €60,000, related to unrealized gains on non-trading equity securities. No changes in
the Share Capital—Ordinary account occurred during the year. Cash dividends during the
period were €10,000. Illustration 4.23 shows a statement of changes in equity for Gill.
Total comprehensive income is comprised of net income of €110,000 added to retained
earnings and €30,000 related to the unrealized gain. Separate columns are used to report
each additional item of other comprehensive income.17 Thus, this statement is useful for
understanding how equity changed during the period.
Gill SpA
Statement of Changes in Equity
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
 
Total
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive
Income
Share
Capital—
Ordinary
Beginning balance
€410,000 € 50,000
€60,000 €300,000
Net income
110,000
110,000  
 
Dividends
(10,000)
(10,000)  
 
Other comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
Unrealized holding gain on non-
trading equity securities, net of tax
30,000
 
30,000
 
Ending balance
€540,000 €150,000
€90,000 €300,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.23 Statement of Changes in Equity
Regardless of the display format used, Gill reports the accumulated other
comprehensive income of €90,000 in the equity section of the statement of financial
position as shown in Illustration 4.24.18

--- Page 343 ---
Gill SpA
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
(Equity Section)
Equity
 
Share capital—ordinary
€300,000
Retained earnings
150,000
Accumulated other comprehensive income
90,000
Total equity
€540,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.24 Presentation of Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income in the Statement of Financial Position
By providing information on the components of comprehensive income, as well as
accumulated other comprehensive income, the company communicates information about
all changes in net assets.19 With this information, users will better understand the quality of
the company’s earnings.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accumulated other comprehensive income
Appropriated Retained Earnings
capital maintenance approach
changes in accounting estimates
changes in accounting principle
comprehensive income
discontinued operation
earnings management
earnings per share
function-of-expense method
income statement
intraperiod tax allocation
nature-of-expense method
non-controlling interest
other comprehensive income
other income and expense
prior period adjustments
quality of earnings

--- Page 344 ---
statement of comprehensive income (comprehensive income statement)
statement of changes in equity
transaction approach
Learning Objectives Review
1 Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
The income statement provides investors and creditors with information that helps them
predict the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. Also, the income
statement helps users determine the risk (level of uncertainty) of not achieving particular
cash flows. The limitations of an income statement are as follows. (1) The statement does
not include many items that contribute to general growth and well-being of a company. (2)
Income numbers are often affected by the accounting methods used. (3) Income measures
are subject to estimates.
2 Describe the content and format of the income statement.
Net income results from revenue, expense, gain, and loss transactions. This method of
income measurement, the transaction approach, focuses on the income-related activities
that have occurred during a given period. Instead of presenting only a net change in net
assets, it discloses the components of the change.
The following sections are generally shown on an income statement: sales or revenue, cost
of goods sold, selling expense, administrative or general expense, financing costs, and
income tax. If present, a company also reports discontinued operations (net of tax). Earnings
per share is reported, and an allocation of net income or loss to the non-controlling interest
is also presented, where applicable. Companies determine net income by deducting expenses
from revenues but also classify various revenues and expenses in order to report useful
subtotals within the income statement. These subtotals are gross profit, income from
operations, income before income tax, and a final total, net income.
3 Discuss how to report various income items.
Companies generally provide some detail on revenues and expenses on the face of the
income statement but may prepare a condensed income statement with details on various
components presented in the notes to the financial statements. Companies are required to
classify expense either by nature or by function. Unusual and non-recurring items should be
reported in income from operations, but financing costs are reported separate from
operating revenues and expenses. Companies report the effects of discontinued operations
of a component of a business as a separate item, after income from continuing operations.
Companies should relate the tax expense for the year to specific items on the income
statement to provide a more informative disclosure to statement users. This procedure,
intraperiod tax allocation, relates the income tax expense for the fiscal period to the
following items that affect the amount of the tax provisions: (1) income from continuing
operations and (2) discontinued operations.

--- Page 345 ---
Companies must disclose earnings per share on the face of the income statement. A
company that reports a discontinued operation must report per share amounts for these line
items either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to the financial statements.
4 Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
Changes in accounting principle and corrections of errors are adjusted through retained
earnings following a retrospective approach. Changes in accounting estimates are a normal
part of the accounting process. The effects of these changes are handled prospectively, with
the effects recorded in income in the period of change and in future periods without
adjustment to retained earnings.
5 Describe related equity statements.
The retained earnings statement should disclose net income (loss), dividends, adjustments
due to changes in accounting principles, error corrections, and restrictions of retained
earnings.
Companies report the components of other comprehensive income in one of two ways: (1) a
combined statement of comprehensive income (one statement format) or (2) in a second
statement (two statement format).
Companies also present a statement of changes in equity. This statement reports the change
in each equity account and in total equity for the period.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions,
and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Presented below are income statement items from Braun Company for the year ended
December 31, 2022.
Sales revenue
$2,700,000
Cost of goods sold
1,150,000
Interest revenue
15,000
Loss from abandonment of plant assets
45,000
Gain from extinguishment of debt
28,000
Selling and administrative expenses
480,000
Effect of change in estimated useful lives of fixed assets
35,000
Loss from earthquake
30,000
Gain on disposal of discontinued operation
50,000
Instructions

--- Page 346 ---
a. Using the information above, prepare an income statement. Assume a tax rate of 30%
and 100,000 ordinary shares outstanding during 2022.
b. Compute comprehensive income for Braun in 2022, assuming Braun had an
unrealized holding loss on non-trading equity securities of $12,000, net of tax.
Solution
a. 
Braun Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
 
$ 2,700,000
Cost of goods sold
 
1,150,000
Gross profit
 
1,550,000
Selling and administrative expenses
 
480,000
 
 
1,070,000
Other income and expense
 
 
Interest revenue
$ 15,000  
Gain on debt extinguishment
28,000  
Loss from plant abandonment
(45,000)  
Loss from earthquake
(30,000)
(32,000)
Income from operations
 
1,038,000
Income tax (30%)
 
311,400
Income from continuing operations
 
726,600
Discontinued operations
 
 
Gain on disposal of discontinued operation
50,000  
Less: Applicable income tax (30%)
15,000
35,000
Net income
 
$
761,600
Per ordinary share
 
 
Income from continuing operations
 
$
7.27
Discontinued operations
 
0.35
Net income
 
$
7.62
b. 
Net income
$761,600  
Unrealized holding loss on non-trading
equity securities, net of tax
12,000
 
Comprehensive income
$749,600
 

--- Page 347 ---
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Questions
1. What kinds of questions about future cash flows do investors and creditors attempt to
answer with information in the income statement?
2. How can information based on past transactions be used to predict future cash flows?
3. Identify at least two situations in which important changes in value are not reported in
the income statement.
4. Identify at least two situations in which application of different accounting methods or
accounting estimates results in difficulties in comparing companies.
5. Explain the transaction approach to measuring income. Why is the transaction approach
to income measurement preferable to other ways of measuring income?
6. What is earnings management?
7. How can earnings management affect the quality of earnings?
8. Why should caution be exercised in the use of the net income figure derived in an income
statement? What are the objectives of IFRS in its application to the income statement?
9. An article in the financial press noted that MicroStrategy (USA) reported higher income
than its competitors by using a more aggressive policy for recognizing revenue on future
upgrades to its products. Some contend that MicroStrategy’s quality of earnings is low. What
does the term “quality of earnings” mean?
10. What is the major distinction between income and expenses under IFRS?
11. Do the elements of financial statements, income and expense, include gains and losses?
Explain.
12. What are the sections of the income statement that comprise (1) gross profit and (2)
income from operations?
13. Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL), in its consolidated income statement, reported a
“settlement of securities class action” €803 million loss. In what section of the income
statement is this amount reported?
14. Explain where the following items are reported on the income statement: (1) interest
expense and (2) income tax.
15. Explain the difference between the “nature-of-expense” and “function-of-expense”
classifications.
16. Discuss the appropriate treatment in the income statement for the following items:
a. Loss on discontinued operations.
b. Non-controlling interest allocation.
c. Earnings per share.

--- Page 348 ---
d. Gain on sale of equipment.
17. Discuss the appropriate treatment in the financial statements of each of the following.
a. Write-down of plant assets due to impairment.
b. A delivery expense on goods sold.
c. Additional depreciation on factory machinery because of an error in computing
depreciation for the previous year.
d. Rent received from subletting a portion of the office space.
e. A patent infringement suit, brought 2 years ago against the company, was settled this
year by a cash payment of NT$725,000.
f. A reduction in the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts balance, because the account
appears to be considerably in excess of the probable loss from uncollectible receivables.
18. Indicate where the following items would ordinarily appear on the financial statements
of Boleyn, plc for the year 2022.
a. The service life of certain equipment was changed from 8 to 5 years. If a 5-year life had
been used previously, additional depreciation of £425,000 would have been charged.
b. In 2022, a flood destroyed a warehouse that had a book value of £1,600,000.
c. In 2022, the company wrote off £1,000,000 of inventory that was considered obsolete.
d. Interest expense for the year was £45,000.
e. In 2019, a supply warehouse with an expected useful life of 7 years was erroneously
expensed.
f. Boleyn, plc changed from weighted-average to FIFO inventory pricing.
19. Indicate the section of an income statement in which each of the following is shown.
a. Loss on inventory write-down.
b. Loss from strike.
c. Bad debt expense.
d. Loss on disposal of a discontinued business.
e. Gain on sale of machinery.
f. Interest expense.
g. Depreciation expense.
h. Interest revenue.
20. Santo SA has eight expense accounts in its general ledger which could be classified as
selling expenses. Should Santo report these eight expenses separately in its income
statement or simply report one total amount for selling expenses? Explain.
21. Cooper Investments reported an unusual gain from the sale of certain assets in its 2022
income statement. How does intraperiod tax allocation affect the reporting of this unusual

--- Page 349 ---
gain?
22. What effect does intraperiod tax allocation have on reported net income?
23. Neumann Company computed earnings per share as follows.
Neumann has a simple capital structure. What possible errors might the company have
made in the computation? Explain.
24. How should a loss on the disposal of a discontinued business be disclosed in the income
statement?
25. Qualls SE reported 2021 earnings per share of €7.21. In 2022, Qualls reported earnings
per share as follows.
On income from continuing operations €8.00
On loss on discontinued operations
.88
On net income
€7.12
Is the decrease in earnings per share from €7.21 to €7.12 a negative trend? Explain.
26. What is meant by “tax allocation within a period”? What is the justification for such a
practice?
27. When does tax allocation within a period become necessary? How should this allocation
be handled?
28. Linus Paper Company decided to close two small pulp mills in Conway, New
Hampshire, and Corvallis, Oregon. Would these closings be reported in a separate section
entitled “Discontinued operations after income from continuing operations”? Discuss.
29. How should corrections of errors be reported in the financial statements?
30. Explain how a change in accounting principle affects the current year’s net income.
31. What major types of items are reported in the retained earnings statement?
32. IFRS usually requires the use of accrual accounting to “fairly present” income. If the
cash receipts and disbursements method of accounting will “clearly reflect” taxable income,
why does this method also not usually “fairly present” income?
33. What are two ways that other comprehensive income may be displayed (reported)?
34. Gribble AG reported the following amounts in 2022: Net income, €150,000; Unrealized
gain related to revaluation of buildings, €10,000, net of tax; Unrealized loss related to non-
trading equity securities, €(35,000), net of tax. Determine Gribble’s total comprehensive
income for 2022.
Brief Exercises
BE4.1 (LO 2) Starr Ltd. had sales revenue of £540,000 in 2022. Other items recorded
during the year were:
Cost of goods sold
£330,000
Net income
Shares outstanding at year-end

--- Page 350 ---
Selling expenses
120,000
Income tax
25,000
Increase in value of employees
15,000
Administrative expenses
10,000
Prepare an income statement for Starr for 2022. Starr has 100,000 shares outstanding.
BE4.2 (LO 2) Brisky Corporation had net sales of $2,400,000 and interest revenue of
$31,000 during 2022. Expenses for 2022 were cost of goods sold $1,450,000, administrative
expenses $212,000, selling expenses $280,000, and interest expense $45,000. Brisky’s tax
rate is 30%. The company had 100,000 shares authorized and 70,000 shares issued and
outstanding during 2022. Prepare an income statement for the year ended December 31,
2022.
BE4.3 (LO 2, 3) The following financial information is related to Volaire Group, a service
company.
Revenues
€800,000
Income from continuing operations
100,000
Comprehensive income
120,000
Net income
90,000
Income from operations
220,000
Selling and administrative expenses
500,000
Income before income tax
200,000
Compute the following: (a) other income and expense, (b) financing costs, (c) income tax,
(d) discontinued operations, and (e) other comprehensive income.
BE4.4 (LO 2, 3) The following information is provided.
Sales revenue
HK$100,000
Gain on sale of plant assets
30,000
Selling and administrative expenses
10,000
Cost of goods sold
55,000
Interest expense
5,000
Income tax rate
20%
Determine (a) income from operations, (b) income before income tax, and (c) net income.
BE4.5 (LO 2, 3) The following information is provided about Caltex Company: income
from operations $430,000, loss on inventory write-downs $12,000, selling expenses
$62,000, and interest expense $20,000. The tax rate is 30%. Determine net income.
BE4.6 (LO 2, 3) Indicate in which section (gross profit, income from operations, or income
before income tax) the following items are reported: (a) interest revenue, (b) interest
expense, (c) loss on impairment of goodwill, (d) sales revenue, and (e) administrative
expenses.

--- Page 351 ---
BE4.7 (LO 2, 3) Finley plc had income from continuing operations of £10,600,000 in 2022.
During 2022, it disposed of its restaurant division at an after-tax loss of £189,000. Prior to
disposal, the division operated at a loss of £315,000 (net of tax) in 2022. Finley had
10,000,000 shares outstanding during 2022. Prepare a partial income statement for Finley
beginning with income from continuing operations.
BE4.8 (LO 3, 4) During 2022, Williamson Company changed from FIFO to weighted-
average inventory pricing. Pretax income in 2021 and 2020 (Williamson’s first year of
operations) under FIFO was $160,000 and $180,000, respectively. Pretax income using
weighted-average pricing in the prior years would have been $145,000 in 2021 and $170,000
in 2020. In 2022, Williamson Company reported pretax income (using weighted-average
pricing) of $180,000. Show comparative income statements for Williamson Company,
beginning with “Income before income tax,” as presented on the 2022 income statement.
(The tax rate in all years is 30%.)
BE4.9 (LO 3, 4) Vandross NV has recorded bad debt expense in the past at a rate of 1½%
of receivables. In 2022, Vandross decides to increase its estimate to 2%. If the new rate had
been used in prior years, cumulative bad debt expense would have been €380,000 instead of
€285,000. In 2022, bad debt expense will be €120,000 instead of €90,000. If Vandross’s tax
rate is 30%, what amount should it report as the cumulative effect of changing the estimated
bad debt rate?
BE4.10 (LO 3) In 2022, Hollis Corporation reported net income of $1,000,000. It declared
and paid preference dividends of $250,000. During 2022, Hollis had a weighted average of
190,000 ordinary shares outstanding. Compute Hollis’s 2022 earnings per share.
BE4.11 (LO 5) Tsui Ltd. has retained earnings of NT$675,000 at January 1, 2022. Net
income during 2022 was NT$1,400,000, and cash dividends declared and paid during 2022
totaled NT$75,000. Prepare a retained earnings statement for the year ended December 31,
2022.
BE4.12 (LO 4, 5) Using the information from BE4.11, prepare a retained earnings
statement for the year ended December 31, 2022. Assume an error was discovered: Land
costing NT$80,000 (net of tax) was charged to repairs expense in 2021.
BE4.13 (LO 5) On January 1, 2022, Otano Ltd. had cash and share capital of ¥60,000,000.
At that date, the company had no other asset, liability, or equity balances. On January 2,
2022, it purchased for cash ¥20,000,000 of non-trading equity securities. It received cash
dividends of ¥3,000,000 during the year on these securities. In addition, it has an unrealized
holding gain on these securities of ¥4,000,000 (net of tax). Determine the following
amounts for 2022: (a) net income, (b) comprehensive income, (c) other comprehensive
income, and (d) accumulated other comprehensive income (end of 2022).
Exercises
E4.1 (LO 2, 5) (Compute Income Measures) Presented below is information related to
Viel AG at December 31, 2022, the end of its first year of operations.
Sales revenue
€310,000
Cost of goods sold
140,000
Selling and administrative expenses
50,000

--- Page 352 ---
Gain on sale of plant assets
30,000
Unrealized gain on non-trading equity securities
10,000
Interest expense
6,000
Loss on discontinued operations
12,000
Allocation to non-controlling interest
40,000
Dividends declared and paid
5,000
Instructions
Compute the following: (a) income from operations, (b) net income, (c) net income
attributable to Viel AG controlling shareholders, (d) comprehensive income, and (e) retained
earnings balance at December 31, 2022. Ignore taxes.
E4.2 (LO 2) (Computation of Net Income) The following are changes in all account
balances of Jackson Furniture during the current year, except for retained earnings.
 
Increase
(Decrease)
 
Increase (Decrease)
Cash
£ 69,000 Accounts Payable
£ (51,000)
Accounts Receivable
(net)
45,000
Bonds Payable
82,000
Inventory
127,000
Share Capital—
Ordinary
138,000
Investments
(47,000)  
 
Instructions
Compute the net income for the current year, assuming that there were no entries in the
Retained Earnings account except for net income and a dividend declaration of £24,000
which was paid in the current year.
E4.3 (LO 2) (Income Statement Items) Presented below are certain account balances of
Wade Products Co.
Rent revenue
$ 6,500 Sales discounts
$ 7,800
Interest expense
12,700 Selling expenses
99,400
Beginning retained earnings
114,400 Sales revenue
400,000
Ending retained earnings
134,000 Income tax expense
26,600
Dividend revenue
71,000 Cost of goods sold
184,400
Sales returns and allowances
12,400 Administrative expenses
82,500
Instructions
Using the information above, compute the following: (a) total net revenue, (b) net income,
and (c) dividends declared during the current year.
E4.4 (LO 2) (Income Statement Presentation) The financial records of Dunbar Inc.
were destroyed by fire at the end of 2022. Fortunately, the controller had kept the following
statistical data related to the income statement.

--- Page 353 ---
1. The beginning merchandise inventory was $92,000, and it decreased 20% during the
current year.
2. Sales discounts amount to $17,000.
3. 30,000 ordinary shares were outstanding for the entire year.
4. Interest expense was $20,000.
5. The income tax rate is 30%.
6. Cost of goods sold amounts to $500,000.
7. Administrative expenses are 18% of cost of goods sold but only 8% of gross sales.
8. Four-fifths of the operating expenses relate to sales activities.
Instructions
Using the information above, prepare an income statement for the year 2022.
E4.5 (LO 2, 3) (Income Statement) Presented below is information related to Webster
plc (amounts in thousands).
Administrative expenses
 
Officers’ salaries
£ 4,900
Depreciation of office furniture and equipment
3,960
Cost of goods sold
63,570
Rent revenue
17,230
Selling expenses
 
Delivery expense
2,690
Sales commissions
7,980
Depreciation of sales equipment
6,480
Sales revenue
96,500
Income tax
7,580
Interest expense
1,860
Instructions
Prepare an income statement for the year 2022. Ordinary shares outstanding for 2022 total
40,550 (in thousands).
E4.6 (LO 2, 3) (Income Statement Items) The following balances were taken from the
books of Parnevik ASA on December 31, 2022.
Interest revenue
€
86,000
Accumulated depreciation—
buildings
€
28,000
Cash
51,000 Notes receivable
155,000
Sales revenue
1,280,000 Selling expenses
194,000
Accounts receivable
150,000 Accounts payable
170,000
Prepaid insurance
20,000 Bonds payable
100,000

--- Page 354 ---
Sales returns and allowances
150,000 Administrative and general
expenses
97,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts
7,000 Accrued liabilities
32,000
Sales discounts
45,000 Interest expense
60,000
Land
100,000 Notes payable
100,000
Equipment
200,000
Loss on impairment of plant
assets
120,000
Buildings
140,000 Share capital—ordinary
500,000
Cost of goods sold
621,000 Retained earnings
21,000
Accumulated depreciation—
equipment
40,000
 
 
Assume the total effective tax rate on all items is 34%.
Instructions
Prepare an income statement; 100,000 ordinary shares were outstanding during the year.
E4.7 (LO 2, 3, 5) (Income Statement) The accountant for Weatherspoon Shoe has
compiled the following information from the company’s records as a basis for an income
statement for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Rent revenue
£ 29,000
Interest expense
18,000
Unrealized gain on non-trading equity securities, net of tax
31,000
Selling expenses
140,000
Income tax
30,600
Administrative expenses
181,000
Cost of goods sold
516,000
Net sales
980,000
Cash dividends declared
16,000
Loss on sale of plant assets
15,000
There were 20,000 ordinary shares outstanding during the year.
Instructions
a. Prepare a comprehensive income statement using the combined statement approach.
b. Prepare a comprehensive income statement using the two statement approach.
c. Which format do you prefer? Discuss.
E4.8 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Income Statement, EPS) Presented below are selected ledger
accounts of McGraw SA as of December 31, 2022.
Cash
€ 50,000
Administrative expenses
100,000

--- Page 355 ---
Selling expenses
80,000
Net sales
540,000
Cost of goods sold
260,000
Cash dividends declared (2022)
20,000
Cash dividends paid (2022)
15,000
Discontinued operations (loss before income tax)
40,000
Depreciation expense, not recorded in 2021
30,000
Retained earnings, December 31, 2021
90,000
Effective tax rate 30%
 
Instructions
a. Compute net income for 2022.
b. Prepare a partial income statement beginning with income before income tax, and
include appropriate earnings per share information. Assume 20,000 ordinary shares
were outstanding during 2022.
E4.9 (LO 2, 3, 4, 5) (Income Statement with Retained Earnings) Presented below is
information related to Tao Ltd. for the year 2022 (amounts in thousands).
Net sales
HK$1,200,000
Write-off of inventory due to
obsolescence
HK$ 80,000
Cost of goods sold
780,000
Depreciation expense omitted by
accident in 2021
40,000
Selling expenses
65,000 Interest expense
50,000
Administrative
expenses
48,000
Cash dividends declared
45,000
Dividend revenue
20,000 Retained earnings at December 31, 2021
980,000
Interest revenue
7,000 Effective tax rate of 34% on all items
 
Instructions
a. Prepare an income statement for 2022. Assume that 60,000 ordinary shares are
outstanding.
b. Prepare a retained earnings statement for 2022.
E4.10 (LO 3) (Earnings per Share) The equity section of Sosa SA appears below as of
December 31, 2022.
Share capital—preference (6% preference shares, R$50 par
value, authorized 100,000 shares, outstanding 90,000
shares)
 
R$
4,500,000
Share capital—ordinary (R$1 par, authorized and issued 10
million shares)
 
10,000,000
Share premium—ordinary
 
20,500,000

--- Page 356 ---
Retained earnings
R$134,000,000  
Net income
33,000,000
167,000,000
 
 
R$202,000,000
Net income for 2022 reflects a total effective tax rate of 20%. Included in the net income
figure is a loss of R$12,000,000 (before tax) as a result of discontinued operations.
Preference dividends of R$270,000 were declared and paid in 2022. Dividends of
R$1,000,000 were declared and paid to ordinary shareholders in 2022.
Instructions
Compute earnings per share data as it should appear on the income statement of Sosa SA.
E4.11 (LO 2, 3) (Condensed Income Statement—Periodic Inventory Method)
Presented below are selected ledger accounts of Woods Corporation at December 31, 2022.
Cash
$ 185,000
Salaries and wages expense
(sales)
$284,000
Inventory (beginning)
535,000
Salaries and wages expense
(office)
346,000
Sales revenue
4,175,000 Purchase returns
15,000
Unearned sales revenue
117,000 Sales returns and allowances
79,000
Purchases
2,786,000 Freight-in
72,000
Sales discounts
34,000 Accounts receivable
142,500
Purchase discounts
27,000 Sales commissions
83,000
Selling expenses
69,000
Telephone and Internet expense
(sales)
17,000
Accounting and legal services
33,000 Utilities expense (office)
32,000
Insurance expense (office)
24,000 Miscellaneous office expenses
8,000
Advertising expense
54,000 Rent revenue
240,000
Delivery expense
93,000 Loss on sale of division
60,000
Depreciation expense (office
equipment)
48,000
Interest expense
176,000
Depreciation expense (sales
equipment)
36,000
Share capital—ordinary ($10 par)
900,000
Woods’s effective tax rate on all items is 30%. A physical inventory indicates that the ending
inventory is $686,000.
Instructions
Prepare a 2022 income statement for Woods Corporation.
E4.12 (LO 4, 5) (Retained Earnings Statement) McEntire Corporation began
operations on January 1, 2019. During its first 3 years of operations, McEntire reported net
income and declared dividends as follows.
 
Net income Dividends declared
2019
$ 40,000
$ –0–

--- Page 357 ---
2020
125,000
50,000
2021
160,000
50,000
The following information relates to 2022.
Income before income tax
$220,000
Prior period adjustment: understatement of 2020 depreciation expense (before
taxes)
$ 25,000
Cumulative decrease in income from change in inventory methods (before taxes) $ 45,000
Dividends declared (of this amount, $25,000 will be paid on Jan. 15, 2023)
$100,000
Effective tax rate
20%
Instructions
a. Prepare a 2022 retained earnings statement for McEntire Corporation.
b. Assume McEntire Corporation restricted retained earnings in the amount of $70,000 on
December 31, 2022. After this action, what would McEntire report as total retained
earnings in its December 31, 2022, statement of financial position?
E4.13 (LO 3) (Earnings per Share) At December 31, 2021, Schroeder SE had the
following shares outstanding.
8% cumulative preference shares, €100 par, 107,500 shares €10,750,000
Ordinary shares, €5 par, 4,000,000 shares
20,000,000
During 2022, Schroeder did not issue any additional shares. The following also occurred
during 2022.
Income before income tax
€21,650,000
Discontinued operations (loss before taxes)
3,225,000
Preference dividends declared
860,000
Ordinary dividends declared
2,200,000
Effective tax rate
35%
Instructions
Compute earnings per share data as it should appear in the 2022 income statement of
Schroeder SE. (Round to two decimal places.)
E4.14 (LO 3, 4) (Change in Accounting Principle) Zehms Company began operations
in 2020 and adopted weighted-average pricing for inventory. In 2022, in accordance with
other companies in its industry, Zehms changed its inventory pricing to FIFO. The pretax
income data is reported below.
Year Weighted-Average
FIFO
2020
$370,000 $395,000
2021
390,000
420,000
2022
410,000
460,000

--- Page 358 ---
Instructions
a. What is Zehms’s net income in 2022? Assume a 35% tax rate in all years.
b. Compute the cumulative effect of the change in accounting principle from weighted-
average to FIFO inventory pricing.
c. Show comparative income statements for Zehms Company, beginning with income
before income tax, as presented on the 2022 income statement.
E4.15 (LO 3, 5) (Comprehensive Income) Gaertner AG reported the following for 2022:
net sales €1,200,000, cost of goods sold €720,000, selling and administrative expenses
€320,000, and an unrealized holding gain on non-trading equity securities.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of comprehensive income, using the two statement format. Ignore
income taxes and earnings per share.
E4.16 (LO 3, 5) (Comprehensive Income) Bryant plc reports the following information
for 2022: sales revenue £750,000, cost of goods sold £500,000, operating expenses
£80,000, and an unrealized holding loss on non-trading equity securities for 2022 of
£50,000. It declared and paid a cash dividend of £10,000 in 2022.
Bryant plc has January 1, 2022, balances in share capital—ordinary £350,000, accumulated
other comprehensive income related to the unrealized holding gain of £80,000, and retained
earnings £90,000. It issued no ordinary shares during 2022. Ignore income taxes.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of changes in equity.
E4.17 (LO 3, 5) (Various Reporting Formats) The following information was taken
from the records of Vega SA for the year 2022: income tax applicable to income from
continuing operations R$119,000, income tax savings applicable to loss on discontinued
operations R$25,500, and unrealized holding gain on non-trading equity securities
R$15,000, net of tax.
Gain on sale of plant assets
R$ 95,000 Cash dividends declared
R$ 150,000
Loss on discontinued
operations
75,000
Retained earnings, January 1,
2022
600,000
Administrative expenses
240,000 Cost of goods sold
850,000
Rent revenue
40,000 Selling expenses
300,000
Loss on impairment of land
60,000 Sales revenue
1,700,000
Ordinary shares outstanding during 2022 were 100,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a comprehensive income statement for 2022 using the one statement approach.
b. Prepare a retained earnings statement for 2022.
E4.18 (LO 5) (Changes in Equity) The equity section of Hasbro Inc. at January 1, 2022,
was as follows.

--- Page 359 ---
Share capital—ordinary
$300,000
Accumulated other comprehensive income
 
Unrealized holding gain on non-trading equity securities
50,000
Retained earnings
20,000
During the year, the company had the following transactions.
1. Issued 10,000 shares at $3 per share.
2. Dividends of $9,000 were declared and paid.
3. Net income for the year was $100,000.
4. Unrealized holding loss of $5,000 occurred on its non-trading equity securities.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of changes in equity for Hasbro Inc.
Problems
P4.1 (LO 2, 3, 5) (Income Components) Presented below are financial statement
classifications for the statement of comprehensive income and the retained earnings
statement. For each transaction or account title, enter in the space provided a letter (or
letters) to indicate the usual classification.
 
Statement of Comprehensive
Income
 
Retained Earnings Statement
A Revenue
F An addition or deduction from beginning
balance
B Operating expense
G Additions to retained earnings
C Other income or expense
H Deduction from retained earnings
D Discontinued operations
I
Note classification
E Other comprehensive income
 
 
Transactions
1.______ Unrealized holding loss on non-trading equity securities.
2.______ Gain on sale of non-trading equity securities.
3.______ Sales revenue.
4.______ Loss on impairment of goodwill.
5.______ Sales salaries accrued.
6.______ Net income for the period.
7.______ Loss on sale of investments.
8.______ Depreciation on equipment used in operations.
9.______ Cash dividends declared and paid.
10.______ Correction of an error due to expensing the cost of equipment in a previous
year.

--- Page 360 ---
11.______ Insurance gain on flood loss—insurance proceeds exceed the carrying amount
of assets destroyed.
12.______ The company has decided to stop production of its candy division and suffered
a loss on the sale of this division.
P4.2 (LO 2, 5) (Income Statement, Retained Earnings) Presented below is
information related to Dickinson AG for 2022.
Retained earnings balance, January 1, 2022
€
980,000
Sales revenue
25,000,000
Cost of goods sold
16,000,000
Interest expense
70,000
Selling and administrative expenses
4,700,000
Write-off of goodwill
820,000
Income taxes
1,244,000
Gain on the sale of investments
110,000
Loss due to flood damage
390,000
Loss on the disposition of the wholesale division (net of tax)
440,000
Loss on operations of the wholesale division (net of tax)
90,000
Dividends declared on ordinary shares
250,000
Dividends declared on preference shares
80,000
Instructions
Prepare an income statement and a retained earnings statement. Dickinson decided to
discontinue its entire wholesale operations and to retain its manufacturing operations. On
September 15, Dickinson sold the wholesale operations to Rogers Company. During 2022,
there were 500,000 ordinary shares outstanding all year.
P4.3 (LO 2, 3, 5) (Income Statement, Retained Earnings, Periodic Inventory)
Presented below is the trial balance of Thompson Ltd. at December 31, 2022.
Thompson Ltd.
Trial Balance
December 31, 2022
 
Debit
Credit
Purchase Discounts
 
£ 10,000
Cash
£ 189,700  
Accounts Receivable
105,000  
Rent Revenue
 
18,000
Retained Earnings
 
160,000
Salaries and Wages Payable
 
18,000
Sales Revenue
 
1,100,000
Notes Receivable
110,000  

--- Page 361 ---
Accounts Payable
 
49,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment  
28,000
Sales Discounts
14,500  
Sales Returns and Allowances
17,500  
Notes Payable
 
70,000
Selling Expenses
232,000  
Administrative Expenses
99,000  
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
300,000
Income Tax Expense
53,900  
Cash Dividends
45,000  
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
 
5,000
Supplies
14,000  
Freight-In
20,000  
Land
70,000  
Equipment
140,000  
Bonds Payable
 
100,000
Gain on Sale of Land
 
30,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings
 
19,600
Inventory
89,000  
Buildings
98,000  
Purchases
610,000  
Totals
£1,907,600 £1,907,600
A physical count of inventory on December 31 resulted in an inventory amount of £64,000;
thus, cost of goods sold for 2022 is £645,000.
Instructions
Prepare an income statement and a retained earnings statement. Assume that the only
changes in retained earnings during the current year were from net income and dividends.
Thirty-thousand ordinary shares were outstanding the entire year.
P4.4 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 (Income Statement Items) Maher AG reported income
before income tax during 2022 of €790,000. Additional transactions occurring in 2022 but
not considered in the €790,000 are as follows.
1. The company experienced an uninsured flood loss in the amount of €90,000 during the
year.
2. At the beginning of 2020, the company purchased a machine for €54,000 (residual
value of €9,000) that had a useful life of 6 years. The bookkeeper used straight-line
depreciation for 2020, 2021, and 2022 but failed to deduct the residual value in
computing the depreciation base.
3. Sale of securities held as a part of its portfolio resulted in a gain of €47,000.

--- Page 362 ---
4. The company disposed of its recreational division at a loss of €115,000 before taxes.
Assume that this transaction meets the criteria for discontinued operations.
5. The company decided to change its method of inventory pricing from average-cost to
the FIFO method. The effect of this change on prior years is to increase 2020 income by
€60,000 and decrease 2021 income by €20,000 before taxes. The FIFO method has
been used for 2022.
Instructions
Prepare an income statement for the year 2022, starting with income before income tax.
Compute earnings per share as it should be shown on the face of the income statement.
Ordinary shares outstanding for the year are 120,000 shares. (Assume a tax rate of 30% on
all items.)
P4.5 (LO 2, 3, 4, 5) (Income Statement, Retained Earnings) The following account
balances were included in the trial balance of Twain Corporation at June 30, 2022.
Sales Revenue
$1,578,500 Depreciation Expense
(sales 
equipment)
$
4,980
Sales Discounts
31,150
Cost of Goods Sold
896,770 Maintenance and Repairs
Expense 
(sales)
6,200
Salaries and Wages Expense (sales)
56,260
Sales Commissions
97,600
Miscellaneous Selling
Expenses
4,715
Travel Expense (salespersons)
28,930 Supplies Expense
3,450
Delivery Expense
21,400 Telephone and Internet
Expense 
(administration)
2,820
Entertainment Expense
14,820
Telephone and Internet Expense 
(sales)
9,030
Depreciation Expense
(office 
furniture and
equipment)
7,250
Property Tax Expense
$
7,320 Income Tax Expense
$102,000
Bad Debt Expense (selling)
4,850 Depreciation
Understatement 
Due to Error—2020 (net
of tax)
17,700
Maintenance and Repairs Expense
(administration)
9,130
Office Expenses
6,000
Dividends (declared on 
preference shares)
9,000
Sales Returns and Allowances
62,300 Dividends (declared on 
ordinary shares)
37,000
Dividend Revenue
38,000
Interest Expense
18,000  
 
The Retained Earnings account had a balance of $337,000 at July 1, 2021. There are 80,000
ordinary shares outstanding.

--- Page 363 ---
Instructions
Prepare an income statement and a retained earnings statement for the year ended June 30,
2022.
P4.6 (LO 2, 3, 4, 5) (Statement Presentation) Presented below is a combined income
and retained earnings statement for Sapporo Ltd. for 2022 (amounts in thousands).
Net sales
 
¥640,000
Costs and expenses
 
 
Cost of goods sold
¥500,000  
Selling, general, and administrative expenses
66,000  
Other, net
17,000
583,000
Income before income tax
 
57,000
Income tax
 
19,400
Net income
 
37,600
Retained earnings at beginning of period, as previously reported
141,000  
Adjustment required for correction of error
(7,000)  
Retained earnings at beginning of period, as restated
 
134,000
Dividends on ordinary shares
 
(12,200)
Retained earnings at end of period
 
¥159,400
Additional facts are as follows.
1. “Selling, general, and administrative expenses” for 2022 included a charge of
¥8,500,000 for impairment of intangibles.
2. “Other, net” for 2022 was a loss on sale of equipment of ¥17,000,000.
3. “Adjustment required for correction of an error” was a result of a change in estimate
(useful life of certain assets reduced to 8 years and a catch-up adjustment made).
4. Sapporo Company disclosed earnings per share for net income in the notes to the
financial statements.
Instructions
Determine from these additional facts whether the presentation of the facts in the Sapporo
Ltd. income and retained earnings statement is appropriate. If the presentation is not
appropriate, describe the appropriate presentation and discuss its theoretical rationale. (Do
not prepare a revised statement.)
P4.7 (LO 4, 5) (Retained Earnings Statement, Prior Period Adjustment) The
following is the retained earnings account for the year 2022 for Acadian Corp.
Retained earnings, January 1, 2022
 
$257,600
Add:
 
 
Gain on sale of investments
$41,200  
Net income
84,500  

--- Page 364 ---
Refund on litigation with government
21,600  
Recognition of income in 2021, but omitted from income statement
in that year
25,400
172,700
 
 
430,300
Deduct:
 
 
Loss on discontinued operations
35,000  
Write-off of goodwill
60,000  
Cumulative effect on income of prior years in changing from
average-cost to FIFO inventory valuation in 2022
23,200
 
Cash dividends declared
32,000
150,200
Retained earnings, December 31, 2022
 
$280,100
Instructions
a. Prepare a corrected retained earnings statement. (Ignore income tax effects.) FIFO
inventory was used in 2022 to compute net income.
b. State where the items that do not appear in the corrected retained earnings statement
should be shown.
P4.8 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 (Income Statement) Wade NV has 150,000 ordinary shares
outstanding. In 2022, the company reports income before income tax of €1,210,000.
Additional transactions not considered in the €1,210,000 are as follows.
1. In 2022, Wade NV sold equipment for €40,000. The machine had originally cost
€80,000 and had accumulated depreciation of €30,000.
2. The company discontinued operations of one of its subsidiaries during the current year
at a loss of €190,000 before taxes. Assume that this transaction meets the criteria for
discontinued operations. The loss from operations of the discontinued subsidiary was
€90,000 before taxes; the loss from disposal of the subsidiary was €100,000 before
taxes.
3. An internal audit discovered that amortization of intangible assets was understated by
€35,000 (net of tax) in a prior period. The amount was charged against retained
earnings.
4. The company had a gain of €125,000 on the condemnation of much of its property.
Instructions
Analyze the above information and prepare an income statement for the year 2022, starting
with income before income tax. Compute earnings per share as it should be shown on the
face of the income statement. (Assume a total effective tax rate of 20% on all items.)
Concepts for Analysis
CA4.1 (LO 1, 2, 3) (Identification of Income Statement Deficiencies) O’Malley plc
requires a bank loan for additional working capital to finance expansion. The bank has
requested an audited income statement for the year 2022. The accountant for O’Malley plc

--- Page 365 ---
provides you with the following income statement, which O’Malley plans to submit to the
bank.
O’Malley plc
Income Statement
Sales revenue
 
£850,000
Dividends
 
32,300
Gain on recovery of insurance proceeds from earthquake loss  
38,500
 
 
920,800
Less:
 
 
Selling expenses
£101,100  
Cost of goods sold
510,000  
Interest expense
13,700  
Loss on obsolescence of inventories
34,000  
Loss on discontinued operations
48,600  
Administrative expenses
73,400
780,800
Income before income tax
 
140,000
Income tax
 
56,000
Net income
 
£ 84,000
Instructions
Indicate the deficiencies in the income statement presented.
CA4.2 (LO 1) 
 (Earnings Management) Bobek Industries has recently
reported steadily increasing income. The company reported income of €20,000 in 2019,
€25,000 in 2020, and €30,000 in 2021. A number of market analysts have recommended
that investors buy Bobek shares because the analysts expect the steady growth in income to
continue. Bobek is approaching the end of its fiscal year in 2022, and it again appears to be a
good year. However, it has not yet recorded warranty expense.
Based on prior experience, this year’s warranty expense should be around €5,000, but some
managers have approached the controller to suggest a larger, more conservative warranty
expense should be recorded this year. Income before warranty expense is €43,000.
Specifically, by recording a €7,000 warranty accrual this year, Bobek could report an
increase in income for this year and still be in a position to cover its warranty costs in future
years.
Instructions
a. What is earnings management?
b. Assume income before warranty expense is €43,000 for both 2022 and 2023 and that
total warranty expense over the 2-year period is €10,000. What is the effect of the
proposed accounting in 2022? In 2023?
c. What is the appropriate accounting in this situation?

--- Page 366 ---
CA4.3 (LO 1) 
 (Earnings Management) Charlie Brown, controller for Kelly
Corporation, is preparing the company’s income statement at year-end. He notes that the
company lost a considerable sum on the sale of some equipment it had decided to replace.
Brown does not want to highlight it as a material loss since he feels that will reflect poorly
on him and the company. He reasons that if the company had recorded more depreciation
during the assets’ lives, the losses would not be so great. Since depreciation is included
among the company’s operating expenses, he wants to report the losses along with the
company’s expenses, where he hopes it will not be noticed.
Instructions
a. What are the ethical issues involved?
b. What should Brown do?
CA4.4 (LO 1) (Income Reporting Items) Simpson Group is an entertainment firm that
derives approximately 30% of its income from the Casino Knights Division, which manages
gambling facilities. As auditor for Simpson, you have recently overheard the following
discussion between the controller and financial vice president.
VICE
PRESIDENT:
If we sell the Casino Knights Division, it seems ridiculous to segregate the
results of the sale in the income statement. Separate categories tend to be
absurd and confusing to the shareholders. I believe that we should simply
report the gain on the sale as other income or expense without detail.
CONTROLLER: IFRS would require that we disclose this information more fully in the
income statement as a gain on discontinued operations.
VICE
PRESIDENT:
What about the walkout we had last month when employees were upset
about their commission income? We had a loss as a result of this walkout.
CONTROLLER: I am not sure where this loss would be reported.
VICE
PRESIDENT:
Oh well, it doesn’t make any difference because the net effect of all these
items is immaterial, so no disclosure is necessary.
Instructions
a. Using the information above, answer the following questions: Who is correct about
handling the sale? What would be the correct income statement presentation for the
sale of the Casino Knights Division?
b. How should the walkout by the employees be reported?
c. What do you think about the vice president’s observation on materiality?
d. What are the earnings per share implications of these topics?
CA4.5 (LO 2, 3) (Identification of Income Statement Weaknesses) The following
financial statement was prepared by employees of Walters plc.
Walters plc
Income Statement
Year Ended December 31, 2022
Revenues
 

--- Page 367 ---
Gross sales, including sales taxes
£1,044,300
Less: Returns, allowances, and cash discounts
56,200
Net sales
988,100
Dividends, interest, and purchase discounts
30,250
Recoveries of accounts written off in prior years
13,850
Total revenues
1,032,200
Costs and expenses
 
Cost of goods sold, including sales taxes
465,900
Salaries and related payroll expenses
60,500
Rent
19,100
Delivery expense and freight-in
3,400
Bad debt expense
27,800
Total costs and expenses
576,700
Income before unusual items
455,500
Unusual items
 
Loss on discontinued styles (Note 1)
71,500
Loss on sale of marketable securities (Note 2)
39,050
Loss on sale of warehouse (Note 3)
86,350
Total unusual items
196,900
Net income
£ 258,600
Net income per ordinary share
£2.30
Note 1: New styles and rapidly changing consumer preferences resulted in a £71,500 loss
on the disposal of discontinued styles and related accessories.
Note 2: The company sold an investment in marketable securities at a loss of £39,050. The
company normally sells securities of this nature.
Note 3: The company sold one of its warehouses at an £86,350 loss.
Instructions
Identify and discuss the weaknesses in classification and disclosure in the income statement
above. You should explain why these treatments are weaknesses and what the proper
presentation of the items would be in accordance with IFRS.
CA4.6 (LO 3, 4, 5) 
 (Classification of Income Statement Items) As audit
manager for Grupo and Rijo, you are in charge of reviewing the classification of unusual
items that have occurred during the current year. The following material items have come to
your attention.
1. A merchandising company incorrectly overstated its ending inventory 2 years ago.
Inventory for all other periods is correctly computed.
2. An automobile dealer sells for $137,000 an extremely rare 1930 S type Invicta which it
purchased for $21,000 10 years ago. The Invicta is the only such display item the dealer
owns.

--- Page 368 ---
3. A drilling company during the current year extended the estimated useful life of certain
drilling equipment from 9 to 15 years. As a result, depreciation for the current year was
materially lowered.
4. A retail outlet changed its computation for bad debt expense from 1% to 1⁄2 of 1% of
gross accounts receivable because of changes in its customer clientele.
5. A mining concern sells a foreign subsidiary engaged in uranium mining. It is the only
uranium mine the company has.
6. A steel company changes from the average-cost method to the FIFO method for
inventory costing purposes.
7. A construction company, at great expense, prepared a major proposal for a government
loan. The loan is not approved.
8. A water pump manufacturer has had large losses resulting from a strike by its
employees early in the year.
9. Depreciation for a prior period was incorrectly understated by $950,000. The error was
discovered in the current year.
10. A large sheep rancher suffered a major loss because the state required that all sheep in
the state be killed to halt the spread of a rare disease. Such a situation has not occurred
in the state for 20 years.
11. A food distributor that sells wholesale to supermarket chains and to fast-food
restaurants (two distinguishable classes of customers) decides to discontinue the
division that sells to one of the two classes of customers.
Instructions
Using the information above, indicate in what section of the income statement or retained
earnings statement these items should be classified. Provide a brief rationale for your
position.
CA4.7 (LO 5) (Comprehensive Income) Willie Nelson, Jr., controller for Jenkins
Corporation, is preparing the company’s financial statements at year-end. Currently, he is
focusing on the income statement and determining the format for reporting comprehensive
income. During the year, the company earned net income of $400,000 and had unrealized
gains on non-trading equity securities of $15,000. In the previous year, net income was
$410,000, and the company had no unrealized gains or losses.
Instructions
a. Show how income and comprehensive income will be reported on a comparative basis
for the current and prior years, using the separate income statement format.
b. Show how income and comprehensive income will be reported on a comparative basis
for the current and prior years, using the combined comprehensive income statement
format.
c. Which format should Nelson recommend?
Using Your Judgment

--- Page 369 ---
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s
complete annual report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
a. What type of income statement format does M&S use? Indicate why this format might
be used to present income statement information.
b. What are M&S’s primary revenue sources?
c. Compute M&S’s gross profit for each of the years 2018 and 2019. Explain why gross
profit increased in 2019.
d. Why does M&S make a distinction between operating and non-operating profit?
e. Does M&S report any non-IFRS measures? Explain.
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B
and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial
statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. Which company had the greater percentage increase in revenues from 2017 to 2018?
b. Did either company report the effect of a discontinued operation in its income
statement? Briefly describe how the reporting of a discontinued operation can affect
comparisons between two companies.
c. Which company had more depreciation and amortization expense as a percentage of
operating cash flow for 2018?
d. Did either company report profit attributed to non-controlling interests? If so, what are
the amounts of the non-controlling interest for each company?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1: Bankruptcy Prediction
The Z-score bankruptcy prediction model uses statement of financial position and income
information to arrive at a Z-Score, which can be used to predict financial distress:
Z =
× 1.2 +
× 1.4 +
× 3.3
+
× .99 +
× 0.6
Working capital
Total assets
Retained earnings
Total assets
EBIT
Total assets
Sales
Total assets
MV equity
Total liabilities

--- Page 370 ---
EBIT is earnings before interest and taxes. MV equity is the market value of equity, which
can be determined by multiplying share price by shares outstanding.
Following extensive testing, it has been shown that companies with Z-scores above 3.0 are
unlikely to fail; those with Z-scores below 1.81 are very likely to fail. While the original
model was developed for publicly held manufacturing companies, the model has been
modified to apply to companies in various industries, emerging companies, and companies
not traded in public markets.
Instructions
a. Use information in the financial statements of a company like Vodafone Group
(GBR) or Nokia (FIN) to compute the Z-score for the past 2 years.
b. Interpret your result. Where does the company fall in the financial distress range?
c. The Z-score uses EBIT as one of its elements. Why do you think this income measure is
used?
Case 2: P/E Ratios
One of the more closely watched ratios by investors is the price/earnings or P/E ratio. By
dividing price per share by earnings per share, analysts get insight into the value the market
attaches to a company’s earnings. More specifically, a high P/E ratio (in comparison to
companies in the same industry) may suggest the shares are overpriced. Also, there is some
evidence that companies with low P/E ratios are underpriced and tend to outperform the
market. However, the ratio can be misleading.
P/E ratios are sometimes misleading because the E (earnings) is subject to a number of
assumptions and estimates that could result in overstated earnings and a lower P/E. Some
analysts conduct “revenue analysis” to evaluate the quality of an earnings number.
Revenues are less subject to management estimates, and all earnings must begin with
revenues. These analysts also compute the price-to-sales ratio (PSR = price per share ÷ sales
per share) to assess whether a company is performing well compared to similar companies.
If a company has a price-to-sales ratio significantly higher than its competitors, investors
may be betting on a company that has yet to prove itself. [Source: Janice Revell, “Beyond
P/E,” Fortune (May 28, 2001), p. 174.]
Instructions
a. Identify some of the estimates or assumptions that could result in overstated earnings.
b. Compute the P/E ratio and the PSR for Puma (DEU) and adidas (DEU) for 2018.
c. Use these data to compare the quality of each company’s earnings.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Counting Crows Ltd. provided the following information for the year 2022.
Retained earnings, January 1, 2022
£ 600,000
Administrative expenses
240,000
Selling expenses
300,000

--- Page 371 ---
Sales revenue
1,900,000
Cash dividends declared
80,000
Cost of goods sold
850,000
Gain on sale of investments
62,700
Loss on discontinued operations
75,000
Rent revenue
40,000
Unrealized holding gain on non-trading equity securities
17,000
Income tax applicable to continuing operations
187,000
Income tax benefit applicable to loss on discontinued operations
25,500
Income tax applicable to unrealized holding gain
2,000
Weighted-average shares outstanding
100,000
Accounting
Prepare (a) an income statement for 2022, (b) a retained earnings statement for 2022, and
(c) a statement of comprehensive income using the two statement format.
Analysis
Explain how income statement subheads can provide useful information to financial
statement readers.
Principles
In a recent meeting with its auditor, Counting Crows’ management argued that the company
should be able to prepare a pro forma income statement, with some one-time administrative
expenses reported similarly to the reporting of discontinued operations. Is such reporting
consistent with the qualitative characteristics of accounting information as discussed in the
Conceptual Framework? Explain.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, Chapter 4: The Elements of
Financial Statements (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018).
[2] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2007), paras. 82–89.
[3] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003).
[4] International Financial Reporting Standard 5, Non-current Assets Held for Sale and
Discontinued Operations (London, U.K.: IASB, 2004).
[5] International Accounting Standard 33, Earnings per Share (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003).
[6] International Accounting Standard 8, Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting
Estimates and Errors (London, U.K.: IASB, 2003).

--- Page 372 ---
[7] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2007), paras. 90–91.
[8] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2007), paras. 81–82.
Research Case
Your client took accounting a number of years ago and was unaware of comprehensive
income reporting. He is not convinced that any accounting standards exist for
comprehensive income.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS
access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in
your Internet browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Which IFRS addresses reporting in the statement of comprehensive income? When was
it issued?
b. Provide the definition of total comprehensive income.
c. Explain the rationale for presenting additional line items, headings, and subtotals in the
statement of comprehensive income.
d. What items of income or expense may be presented either in the statement of
comprehensive income or in the notes?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the income statement under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
Standards issued by the FASB (U.S. GAAP) are the primary global alternative to IFRS. As in
IFRS, the income statement is a required statement for U.S. GAAP. In addition, the content
and presentation of the U.S. GAAP income statement are similar to those used for IFRS. A
number of U.S. GAAP standards have been issued that provide guidance on issues related to
income statement presentation.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
the income statement.
Similarities
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require companies to indicate the amount of net income
attributable to non-controlling interest.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS follow the same presentation guidelines for discontinued
operations, but IFRS defines a discontinued operation more narrowly. Both standard-

--- Page 373 ---
setters have indicated a willingness to develop a similar definition to be used in the
joint project on financial statement presentation.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS have items that are recognized in equity as part of other
comprehensive income but do not affect net income. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow a
one statement or two statement approach to preparing the statement of comprehensive
income.
Differences
Presentation of the income statement under U.S. GAAP follows either a single-step or
multiple-step format. IFRS does not mention a single-step or multiple-step approach.
The U.S. SEC requires companies to have a functional presentation of expenses. Under
IFRS, companies must classify expenses by either nature or function. U.S. GAAP does
not have that requirement.
U.S. GAAP has no minimum information requirements for the income statement.
However, the U.S. SEC rules have more rigorous presentation requirements. IFRS
identifies certain minimum items that should be presented on the income statement.
U.S. SEC regulations define many key measures and provide requirements and
limitations on companies reporting non-U.S. GAAP information. IFRS does not define
key measures like income from operations.
U.S. GAAP does not permit revaluation accounting. Under IFRS, revaluation of property,
plant, and equipment, and intangible assets is permitted and is reported as other
comprehensive income. The effect of this difference is that application of IFRS results
in more transactions affecting equity but not net income.
About the Numbers
The terminology used in the IFRS literature is sometimes different than what is used in U.S.
GAAP. For example, here are some of the differences related to this chapter.
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
Equity or shareholders’
equity
Shareholders’ equity or stockholders’ equity
Share capital—ordinary
Common stock
Share capital—preference
Preferred stock
Ordinary shares
Common shares
Preference shares
Preferred shares
Share premium—ordinary
Premium on common stock or Paid-in capital in excess of par—
common
Share premium—
preference
Premium on preferred stock or Paid-in capital in excess of par—
preferred
Reserves
Retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive
income
Statement of financial
position
Balance sheet or Statement of financial position

--- Page 374 ---
Profit or loss
Net income or Net loss
On the Horizon
At one time, the IASB and the FASB worked on a project to converge their standards related
to financial statement presentation, including the income statement. A key feature of that
project was that each of the statements would be organized in the same format, to separate
an entity’s financing activities from its operating and investing activities, and to separate
financing activities into transactions with owners and creditors. Thus, the same
classifications used in the income statement could be used in the statement of cash flows
and the statement of financial position. That original convergence project has been on hold,
and both Boards are now focusing on performance reporting (the income statement). The
Boards expect to issue similar new guidelines for reporting in the income statement,
involving additional income subtotals and increased disaggregation—referred to as
additional “rows and columns”—to provide more useful information in the income
statement. Go to the IASB and FASB websites and search performance reporting for more
information.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following is required to be reported in an income statement under U.S.
GAAP but not under IFRS?
a. Discontinued operations.
b. Income from operations.
c. Cost of goods sold.
d. Income tax.
2. Which of the following statements is correct regarding income reporting under IFRS
compared to U.S. GAAP?
a. IFRS does not permit revaluation of property, plant, and equipment, and intangible
assets.
b. IFRS provides the same options for reporting comprehensive income as U.S. GAAP.
c. Companies must classify expenses by nature.
d. IFRS provides a definition for all items presented in the income statement.
3. Under U.S. GAAP:
a. companies must report comprehensive income in a single statement.
b. companies must report comprehensive income using a two statement approach.
c. companies must report income using a multiple step format.
d. companies can report comprehensive income using either a one statement or two
statement approach.
4. The non-controlling interest section of the income statement is:

--- Page 375 ---
a. required under U.S. GAAP but not under IFRS.
b. required under IFRS but not under U.S. GAAP.
c. required under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
d. not reported under U.S. GAAP or IFRS.
5. Common terminology under U.S. GAAP includes all of the following except:
a. common stock.
b. retained earnings.
c. net income/loss.
d. reserves.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP 4.1 What are U.S. GAAP’s requirements with respect to expense classification?
GAAP 4.2 Bradshaw Company experienced a loss that was deemed to be both unusual in
nature and infrequent in occurrence. How should Bradshaw report this item in accordance
with U.S. GAAP?
GAAP 4.3 Explain the U.S. GAAP reporting guidelines for items recognized in
comprehensive income that do not affect net income.
GAAP 4.4 Presented below is the income statement for Campbell Soup Company
(USA). Campbell prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
 
2019
2018
2017
Net sales
$8,107 $6,615 $5,837
Costs and expenses
 
 
 
Cost of products sold
5,414
4,241
3,395
Marketing and selling expenses
842
728
675
Administrative expenses
610
563
448
Research and development expenses
91
91
93
Other expenses (income)
140
(73)
(216)
Restructuring charges
31
55
11
Total costs and expenses
7,128
5,605
4,406
Earnings before interest and taxes
979
1,010
1,431
Interest expense
356
183
115
Interest income
2
3
—
Earnings before taxes
625
830
1,316
Taxes on earnings
151
106
392
Earnings from continuing operations
474
724
924
Loss from discontinued operations
(263)
(463)
(37)
Net earnings
211
261
887

--- Page 376 ---
Less: Net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
$ 211
$ 261
$ 887
Per Share—Basic
 
 
 
Earnings from continuing operations attributable to Campbell
Soup Company
$ 1.57
$ 2.41
$ 3.03
Loss from discontinued operations
(0.87)
(1.54)
(0.12)
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
$ 0.70 $ 0.87
$ 2.91
Weighted average shares outstanding—basic
301
301
305
Per Share—Assuming Dilution
 
 
 
Earnings from continuing operations attributable to Campbell
Soup Company
$ 1.57 $ 2.40
$ 3.01
Loss from discontinued operations
(0.87)
(1.53)
(0.12)
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
$ 0.70 $ 0.86
$ 2.89
Weighted average shares outstanding—assuming dilution
302
302
307
Instructions
a. Review the Campbell income statement and identify similarities and differences
between the U.S. GAAP income statement and an income statement of an IFRS
company as presented in the chapter.
b. Identify non-recurring items reported by Campbell, if any. Is the reporting of these non-
recurring items in the income statement under U.S. GAAP similar to reporting of these
items in IFRS companies’ income statements? Explain.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. b 2. b 3. d 4. c 5. d
Notes
1 We will use the term income statement except in situations where a company reports other
comprehensive income (discussed later in the chapter). In that case, we will use the term
statement of comprehensive income or comprehensive income statement. Also,
note that IFRS uses other names to refer to the income statement, including the
statement of profit or loss, and the statement of financial performance.
2 In support of the usefulness of income information, accounting researchers have
documented an association between the market prices of companies and reported
income. See W. H. Beaver, “Perspectives on Recent Capital Markets Research,” The
Accounting Review (April 2002), pp. 453–474.
3 A. Levitt, “The Numbers Game.” Remarks to NYU Center for Law and Business, September
28, 1998 (Securities and Exchange Commission, 1998). A recent study indicates that
earnings management is pervasive across U.S., European, and Asian companies, whether
they use U.S. GAAP or IFRS. See M. Evans, R. Houston, M. Peters, and J. Pratt,
“Reporting Regulatory Environments and Earnings Management: U.S. and Non-U.S.

--- Page 377 ---
Firms Using U.S. GAAP or IFRS,” The Accounting Review (September 2015), pp. 1969–
1994.
4 The most common alternative to the transaction approach is the capital maintenance
approach to income measurement. Under this approach, a company determines income
for the period based on the change in equity, after adjusting for capital contributions (e.g.,
investments by owners) or distributions (e.g., dividends). The main drawback associated
with the capital maintenance approach is that the components of income are not evident
in its measurement. Various tax authorities use the capital maintenance approach to
identify unreported income and refer to this approach as the “net worth check.”
5 The IASB takes the position that income includes both revenues and gains because they
both reflect increases in economic benefits. Similarly, expenses include both expenses
and losses because they both reflect decreases in economic benefits.
6 If a company prepares a statement of comprehensive income, then disclosure is required
for (1) other comprehensive income classified by nature, (2) comprehensive income of
associates and joint ventures, and (3) total comprehensive income. The statement of
comprehensive income is discussed in more detail later in the chapter.
7 Manufacturing companies that follow the nature-of-expense method generally report
direct labor, raw materials used, and changes in inventory related to work-in-process and
finished goods. The overhead items are listed as basic expenses. If the function-of-
expense method is used, depreciation expense, amortization expense, and labor costs
must also be disclosed because this information is considered useful for predicting future
cash flows.
8 Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: AICPA) and IFRS Accounting Trends and
Techniques (New York: AICPA).
9 As indicated in the opening story, the IASB is working on a project on financial statement
presentation, on how to best report income as well as information presented in the
statement of financial position and the statement of cash flows.
10 D. McDermott, “Latest Profit Data Stir Old Debate Between Net and Operating Income,”
Wall Street Journal (May 3, 1999); and T. Shumsky, “IASB Chair Rings Alarm Over Use of
Non-GAAP Measures,” Wall Street Journal (May 11, 2016).
11 In calculating earnings per share, companies deduct preference dividends from net
income if the dividends are declared or if they are cumulative, though not declared. In
addition, any amount allocated to the non-controlling interest should be deducted from
net income in determining earnings per share.
12 We discuss the computational problems involved in accounting for these dilutive
securities in earnings per share computations in Chapter 16.
13 In practice, companies are required to report only one line on the income statement, such
as “Loss on discontinued operations,” and then in the notes explain the two loss
components that total £800,000. For homework purposes, report both amounts on the
face of the income statement, net of tax, if both amounts are provided.

--- Page 378 ---
14 Formally, an entity changes an accounting principle when the change is required by IFRS
or the change results in the financial statements providing a more reliable and faithfully
representative depiction of the effect of transactions or events. IAS 8 refers to this as a
change in accounting policy. In Chapter 22, we examine in greater detail the problems
related to accounting changes, and changes in estimates (discussed in the next section).
15 We further discuss non-trading equity securities in Chapter 17. Additional examples of
other comprehensive items are translation gains and losses on foreign currency,
unrealized gains and losses on certain hedging transactions (Chapter 17 Appendix),
actuarial gains and losses in certain situations (Chapter 20), and changes in revaluation
surplus (Chapters 11 and 12).
16 A company must display the components of other comprehensive income either (1) net of
related tax effects, or (2) before related tax effects, with one amount shown for the
aggregate amount of tax related to the total amount of other comprehensive income. Both
alternatives must show each component of other comprehensive income, net of related
taxes, either on the face of the statement or in the notes. [7]
17 The other comprehensive income section shall present line items for amounts of other
comprehensive income, grouped into those that, in accordance with other IFRSs, (a) will
not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss, and (b) will be reclassified subsequently
to profit or loss when specific conditions are met. If a company has non-controlling
interest, an additional column would be added to report changes in non-controlling
interest amounts. [8]
18 Many companies use the term Reserve to include all items in equity except for
contributed capital. Contributed capital is comprised of Share Capital (ordinary and
preference) and Share Premium (ordinary and preference). Rather than the term Reserve,
we use Retained Earnings and Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income because these
concepts are more descriptive of the items in the equity section.
19 Corrections of errors and changes in accounting principle are not considered other
comprehensive income items.
Sources: H. Hoogervorst, “The Imprecise World of Accounting,” Speech to the International Association for Accounting
Education and Research (June 20, 2012); and N. Trentmann, “IASB Plans Overhaul of Financial Definitions,” Wall
Street Journal (November 2, 2016); and “Primary Financial Statements: Project Overview” (IASB: September 2018).

--- Page 379 ---
