CHAPTER 2
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the usefulness of a conceptual framework and the
objective of financial reporting.
2. Identify the qualitative characteristics of accounting
information and the basic elements of financial statements.
3. Review the basic assumptions of accounting.
4. Explain the application of the basic principles of accounting.

--- Page 112 ---
This chapter provides a foundation for numerous
conceptual discussions that are integral to the topics in
subsequent chapters.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 2
As the following opening story indicates, users of financial
statements can face difficult questions about the recognition and
measurement of financial items. To help develop the type of
financial information that can be used to answer these questions,
financial accounting and reporting relies on a conceptual
framework. In this chapter, we discuss the basic concepts
underlying the conceptual framework, as follows.
What Is It?
Everyone agrees that accounting needs a framework—a conceptual
framework, so to speak—that will help guide the development of
standards. To understand the importance of developing this
framework, let’s see how you would respond in the following two
situations.

--- Page 113 ---
Situation 1: “Taking a Long Shot … ”
To supplement donations collected from its general community
solicitation, Tri-Cities United Charities holds an Annual Lottery
Sweepstakes. In this year’s sweepstakes, United Charities is
offering a grand prize of $1,000,000 to a single winning ticket
holder. A total of 10,000 tickets have been printed, and United
Charities plans to sell all the tickets at a price of $150 each.
Since its inception, the Sweepstakes has attracted area-wide
interest, and United Charities has always been able to meet its
sales target. However, in the unlikely event that it might fail to sell
a sufficient number of tickets to cover the grand prize, United
Charities has reserved the right to cancel the Sweepstakes and to
refund the price of the tickets to holders.
In recent years, a fairly active secondary market for tickets has
developed. This year, buying–selling prices have varied between
$75 and $95 before stabilizing at about $90.
When the tickets first went on sale this year, multimillionaire Phil
N. Tropic, well-known in Tri-Cities civic circles as a generous but
sometimes eccentric donor, bought one of the tickets from United
Charities, paying $150 cash.
How would you answer the following questions?
1. Should Phil N. Tropic recognize his lottery ticket as an asset in his
financial statements?
2. Assuming that Phil N. Tropic recognizes the lottery ticket as an
asset, at what amount should it be reported? Some possible
answers are $150, $100, and $90.

--- Page 114 ---
Situation 2: The $20 Million Question
The Hard Rock Mining Company has just completed the first year
of operations at its new strip mine, the Lonesome Doe. Hard Rock
spent $10 million for the land and $20 million in preparing the
site for mining operations. The mine is expected to operate for 20
years. Hard Rock is subject to environmental statutes requiring it
to restore the Lonesome Doe mine site on completion of mining
operations.
Based on its experience and industry data, as well as current
technology, Hard Rock forecasts that restoration will cost about
$10 million when it is undertaken. Of those costs, about $4 million
is for restoring the topsoil that was removed in preparing the site
for mining operations (prior to opening the mine); the rest is
directly proportional to the depth of the mine, which in turn is
directly proportional to the amount of ore extracted.
How would you answer the following questions?
1. Should Hard Rock recognize a liability for site restoration in
conjunction with the opening of the Lonesome Doe Mine? If so,
what is the amount of that liability?
2. After Hard Rock has operated the Lonesome Doe Mine for five
years, new technology is introduced that reduces Hard Rock’s
estimated future restoration costs to $7 million, $3 million of
which relates to restoring the topsoil. How should Hard Rock
account for this change in its estimated future liability?
The answers to these questions depend on how assets and liabilities
are defined and how they should be valued. The International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) recently issued an update to its
conceptual framework with what are hoped to be improved definitions
for assets and liabilities. This chapter reflects those new definitions as
well as measurement concepts, which provide the IASB and you with a
framework to resolve questions like these.

--- Page 115 ---
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for
a targeted summary review and practice problem with solution.
Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as
additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also
available online.
Conceptual Framework
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the usefulness of a conceptual framework and the
objective of financial reporting.
A conceptual framework establishes the concepts that underlie
financial reporting. A conceptual framework is a coherent system of
concepts that flow from an objective. The objective identifies the
purpose of financial reporting. The other concepts provide guidance
on (1) identifying the boundaries of financial reporting; (2) selecting
the transactions, other events, and circumstances to be represented;
(3) how they should be recognized and measured; and (4) how they
should be summarized and reported.1
Need for a Conceptual Framework
Why do we need a conceptual framework? First, to be useful, rule-
making should build on and relate to an established body of concepts.
A soundly developed conceptual framework thus enables the IASB to
issue more useful and consistent pronouncements over time,
and a coherent set of standards should result. Indeed, without the
guidance provided by a soundly developed framework, standard-
setting ends up being based on individual concepts developed by each
member of the standard-setting body. The following observation by a
former standard-setter highlights the problem.

--- Page 116 ---
“As our professional careers unfold, each of us develops a
technical conceptual framework. Some individual frameworks are
sharply defined and firmly held; others are vague and weakly
held; still others are vague and firmly held…. At one time or
another, most of us have felt the discomfort of listening to
somebody buttress a preconceived conclusion by building a
convoluted chain of shaky reasoning. Indeed, perhaps on occasion
we have voiced such thinking ourselves…. My experience …
taught me many lessons. A major one was that most of us have a
natural tendency and an incredible talent for processing new facts
in such a way that our prior conclusions remain intact.”2
In other words, standard-setting that is based on personal conceptual
frameworks will lead to different conclusions about identical or
similar issues than it did previously. As a result, standards will not be
consistent with one another, and past decisions may not be indicative
of future ones. Furthermore, the framework should increase financial
statement users’ understanding of and confidence in financial
reporting. It should also enhance comparability among companies’
financial statements.
Second, as a result of a soundly developed conceptual framework, the
profession should be able to more quickly solve new and emerging
practical problems by referring to an existing framework of
basic theory. For example, assume that Aphrodite Gold Ltd.
(AUS) issued bonds with two payment options. It can redeem them
either with $2,000 in cash or with 5 ounces of gold, whichever is
worth more at maturity. The bonds have a stated interest rate of 8.5
percent. At what amounts should Aphrodite or the buyers of the bonds
record them? What is the amount of the premium or discount on the
bonds? And how should Aphrodite amortize this amount, if the bond
redemption payments are to be made in gold (the future value of
which is unknown at the date of issuance)? Consider that Aphrodite
cannot know, at the date of issuance, the value of future gold bond
redemption payments.
It is difficult, if not impossible, for the IASB to prescribe the proper
accounting treatment quickly for situations like this or like those

--- Page 117 ---
represented in our opening story. Practicing accountants, however,
must resolve such problems on a daily basis. How? Through good
judgment and with the help of a universally accepted conceptual
framework, practitioners can quickly focus on an acceptable
treatment.
What Do the Numbers Mean?
What’s Your Principle?
The need for a conceptual framework is highlighted by accounting
scandals such as those at Royal Ahold (NLD), Enron (USA),
Satyan Computer Services (IND), and, most recently,
Carillion (GBR). To restore public confidence in the financial
reporting process, many have argued that regulators should move
toward principles-based rules. They believe that companies
exploited the detailed provisions in rules-based pronouncements
to manage accounting reports, rather than report the economic
substance of transactions.
For example, many of the off-balance-sheet arrangements of
Enron avoided transparent reporting by barely achieving 3 percent
outside equity ownership, a requirement in an obscure accounting
rule interpretation. Enron’s financial engineers were able to
structure transactions to achieve a desired accounting treatment,
even if that accounting treatment did not reflect the transaction’s
true nature. Under principles-based rules, hopefully top
management’s financial reporting focus will shift from
demonstrating compliance with rules to demonstrating that a
company has attained financial reporting objectives.
Development of a Conceptual Framework
In 2018, the IASB published the Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting (the Conceptual Framework). This fully revised document
replaced the section of the 2010 version of the Conceptual Framework
that had been carried forward from the 1989 version, as well as

--- Page 118 ---
addressed some changes introduced in 2010. The Conceptual
Framework comprises eight chapters, as follows.
Chapter 1, The Objective of General Purpose Financial
Statements.
Chapter 2, Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial
Information.
Chapter 3, Financial Statements and the Reporting Entity.
Chapter 4, The Elements of Financial Statements.
Chapter 5, Recognition and Derecognition.
Chapter 6, Measurement.
Chapter 7, Presentation and Disclosure.
Chapter 8, Concepts of Capital and Capital Maintenance.
The IASB worked diligently to complete the Conceptual Framework,
as the Board recognized the need for such a document to serve its
diverse users. It should be emphasized that while the Conceptual
Framework is not an IFRS, it is part of the authoritative literature.
Thus, the Conceptual Framework can provide guidance in many
situations where an IFRS does not cover the issue under
consideration.3 [2]
Overview of the Conceptual Framework
Illustration 2.1 provides an overview of the IASB’s Conceptual
Framework for Financial Reporting, also referred to simply as the
Conceptual Framework.

--- Page 119 ---
ILLUSTRATION 2.1 Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting
The first level identifies the objective of financial reporting—that
is, the purpose of financial reporting. The second level provides the
qualitative characteristics that make accounting information
useful and the elements of financial statements (assets,
liabilities, and so on). The third level identifies the recognition,
measurement, and disclosure concepts used in establishing and
applying accounting standards and the specific concepts to implement
the objective. These concepts include assumptions, principles, and a

--- Page 120 ---
cost constraint that describe the present reporting environment. We
examine these three levels of the Conceptual Framework next.
Basic Objective
The objective of financial reporting is the foundation of the
Conceptual Framework. Other aspects of the Conceptual Framework—
qualitative characteristics, elements of financial statements,
recognition, measurement, and disclosure—flow logically from the
objective. Those aspects of the Conceptual Framework help to ensure
that financial reporting achieves its objective.
The objective of general-purpose financial reporting is to provide
financial information about the reporting entity that is useful to
present and potential equity investors, lenders, and other
creditors in making decisions about providing resources to the
entity. Those decisions involve buying, selling, or holding equity and
debt instruments, and providing or settling loans and other forms of
credit. To make effective decisions, these parties need information to
help them assess a company’s prospects for future net cash flows
and/or provide a return to existing and potential investors, lenders,
and other creditors. For example, a lender may need information in
order to decide whether to loan money to a company. Similarly, an
equity investor may need information about a company’s profitability
in order to decide whether to purchase or sell shares.
Management stewardship is how well management uses a
company’s resources to create and sustain value. To evaluate
stewardship, companies should provide information about their
financial position, changes in financial position, and performance.
They should also show how efficiently and effectively management
and the board of directors have discharged their responsibilities to use
the company’s resources wisely. Therefore, information that is useful
in assessing stewardship can also be useful for assessing a company’s
prospects for future net cash inflows. [3]
Information that is decision-useful to capital providers may also be
helpful to users of financial reporting who are not capital providers.
As indicated in Chapter 1, to provide information to decision-makers,

--- Page 121 ---
companies prepare general-purpose financial statements. General-
purpose financial reporting helps users who lack the ability to
demand all the financial information they need from a company and
who must therefore rely, at least partly, on the information provided
in financial reports. However, an implicit assumption is that users
need reasonable knowledge of business and financial accounting
matters to understand the information contained in financial
statements. This point is important. It means that financial statement
preparers assume a level of competence on the part of users. This
assumption impacts the way and the extent to which companies
report information.
Fundamental Concepts
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify the qualitative characteristics of accounting information
and the basic elements of financial statements.
The objective (first level) focuses on the purpose of financial
reporting. Later, we will discuss the ways in which this purpose is
implemented (third level). What, then, is the purpose of the second
level? The second level provides conceptual building blocks that
explain the qualitative characteristics of accounting information and
define the elements of financial statements. [4] That is, the second
level forms a bridge between the why of accounting (the objective)
and the how of accounting (recognition, measurement, and financial
statement presentation).
Qualitative Characteristics of Accounting Information
Should a company like Marks and Spencer plc (GBR) provide
information in its financial statements on how much it costs to
acquire its assets (historical cost basis), or how much the assets are
currently worth (fair value basis)? Should Samsung (KOR) combine
and show as one company the main segments of its business, or
should it report Consumer Electronics, Information Technology &

--- Page 122 ---
Mobile Communications, Device Solutions, and Harman as separate
segments?
How does a company choose an acceptable accounting method, the
amount and types of information to disclose, and the format in which
to present it? The answer: By determining which alternative
provides the most useful information for decision-making
purposes (decision-usefulness). The IASB identified the
qualitative characteristics of accounting information that
distinguish better (more useful) information from inferior (less
useful) information for decision-making purposes. In addition, the
IASB identified a cost constraint as part of the Conceptual Framework
(discussed later in the chapter). As Illustration 2.2 shows, the
characteristics may be viewed as a hierarchy.
ILLUSTRATION 2.2 Hierarchy of Accounting Qualities
As indicated by Illustration 2.2, qualitative characteristics are either
fundamental or enhancing characteristics, depending on how they

--- Page 123 ---
affect the decision-usefulness of information. Regardless of
classification, each qualitative characteristic contributes to the
decision-usefulness of financial reporting information. However,
providing useful financial information is limited by a pervasive
constraint on financial reporting—cost should not exceed the benefits
of a reporting practice.
Fundamental Quality—Relevance
Relevance is one of the two fundamental qualities that make
accounting information useful for decision-making. Relevance and
related ingredients of this fundamental quality are shown below.
To be relevant, accounting information must be capable of making a
difference in a decision. Information with no bearing on a decision is
irrelevant. Financial information is capable of making a difference
when it has predictive value, confirmatory value, or both.
Financial information has predictive value if it has value as an input
to predictive processes used by investors to form their own
expectations about the future. For example, if potential investors are
interested in purchasing ordinary shares in Nippon (JPN), they may
analyze its current resources and claims to those resources, its
dividend payments, and its past income performance to predict the
amount, timing, and uncertainty of Nippon’s future cash flows.
Relevant information also helps users confirm or correct prior
expectations; it has confirmatory value. For example, when Nippon
issues its year-end financial statements, it confirms or changes past
(or present) expectations based on previous evaluations. It follows

--- Page 124 ---
that predictive value and confirmatory value are interrelated. For
example, information about the current level and structure of
Nippon’s assets and liabilities helps users predict its ability to take
advantage of opportunities and to react to adverse situations. The
same information helps to confirm or correct users’ past predictions
about that ability.
Materiality is a company-specific aspect of relevance. Information is
material if omitting it or misstating it could influence decisions that
users make on the basis of the reported financial information. An
individual company determines whether information is material
because both the nature and/or magnitude of the item(s) to which the
information relates must be considered in the context of an individual
company’s financial report. Information is immaterial, and therefore
irrelevant, if it would have no impact on a decision-maker. In short, it
must make a difference or a company need not disclose it.
Assessing materiality is one of the more challenging aspects of
accounting because it requires evaluating both the relative size and
importance of an item. However, it is difficult to provide firm
guidelines in judging when a given item is or is not material.
Materiality varies both with relative amount and with relative
importance. For example, the two sets of numbers in Illustration
2.3 indicate relative size.
Company A Company B
Sales
$10,000,000
$100,000
Costs and expenses
9,000,000
90,000
Income from operations $ 1,000,000
$ 10,000
Unusual gain
$ 20,000
$ 5,000
ILLUSTRATION 2.3 Materiality Comparison
During the period in question, the revenues and expenses, and
therefore the net incomes of Company A and Company B, are
proportional. Each reported an unusual gain. In looking at the
abbreviated income figures for Company A, it appears insignificant
whether the amount of the unusual gain is set out separately or

--- Page 125 ---
merged with the regular operating income. The gain is only 2 percent
of the operating income. If merged, it would not seriously distort the
income figure. Company B has had an unusual gain of only $5,000.
However, it is relatively much more significant than the larger gain
realized by Company A. For Company B, an item of $5,000 amounts
to 50 percent of its income from operations. Obviously, the inclusion
of such an item in operating income would affect the amount of that
income materially. Thus, we see the importance of the relative size
of an item in determining its materiality.
Companies and their auditors generally adopt the rule of thumb that
anything under 5 percent of net income is considered immaterial.
However, much can depend on specific rules. For example, one
market regulator indicates that a company may use this percentage for
an initial assessment of materiality, but it must also consider other
factors. For example, companies can no longer fail to record items in
order to meet consensus analysts’ earnings numbers, preserve a
positive earnings trend, convert a loss to a profit or vice versa,
increase management compensation, or hide an illegal transaction
like a bribe. In other words, companies must consider both
quantitative and qualitative factors in determining whether
an item is material.
Thus, it is generally not feasible to specify uniform quantitative
thresholds at which an item becomes material. Rather, materiality
judgments should be made in the context of the nature and the
amount of an item. Materiality factors into a great many internal
accounting decisions, too. Examples of such judgments that
companies must make include the amount of classification required
in a subsidiary expense ledger, the degree of accuracy required in
allocating expenses among the departments of a company, and the
extent to which adjustments should be made for accrued and deferred
items. Only by the exercise of good judgment and professional
expertise can reasonable and appropriate answers be found, which is
the materiality concept sensibly applied.
Fundamental Quality—Faithful Representation

--- Page 126 ---
Faithful representation is the second fundamental quality that makes
accounting information useful for decision-making. Faithful
representation and related ingredients of this fundamental quality are
shown as follows.
Faithful representation means that the numbers and descriptions
match what really existed or happened. Faithful representation is a
necessity because most users have neither the time nor the expertise
to evaluate the factual content of the information. For example, if
Siemens AG’s (DEU) income statement reports sales of €92,403
million when it had sales of €79,644 million, then the statement fails
to faithfully represent the proper sales amount. To be a faithful
representation, information must be complete, neutral, and free of
material error.
Completeness
Completeness means that all the information that is necessary for
faithful representation is provided. An omission can cause
information to be false or misleading and thus not be helpful to the
users of financial reports. For example, when Société Générale
(FRA) fails to provide information needed to assess the value of its
subprime loan receivables (toxic assets), the information is not
complete and therefore not a faithful representation of the value of
the receivable.
Neutrality

--- Page 127 ---
Neutrality means that a company cannot select information to favor
one set of interested parties over another. Providing neutral or
unbiased information must be the overriding consideration. For
example, in the notes to financial statements, tobacco companies such
as British American Tobacco (GBR) should not suppress
information about the numerous lawsuits that have been filed
because of tobacco-related health concerns—even though such
disclosure is damaging to the company.
Neutrality in rule-making has come under increasing attack. Some
argue that the IASB should not issue pronouncements that cause
undesirable economic effects on an industry or company. We disagree.
Accounting rules (and the standard-setting process) must be free from
bias, or we will no longer have credible financial statements. Without
credible financial statements, individuals will no longer use this
information. An analogy demonstrates the point: Many individuals bet
on boxing matches because such contests are assumed not to be fixed.
But nobody bets on wrestling matches. Why? Because the public
assumes that wrestling matches are rigged. If financial information is
biased or rigged, the public will lose confidence and no longer use it.
The IASB indicates that neutrality is supported by prudence.
Prudence is the exercise of caution when making judgments under
conditions of uncertainty. That is, the exercise of prudence means that
assets and income are not overstated, and liabilities and expenses are
not understated. Furthermore, exercising prudence does not mean a
decision maker should give primacy to the understatement of assets
or income, or the overstatement of liabilities or expenses. Such
misstatements can lead to the overstatement or understatement of
income or expenses in future periods. Similarly, exercising prudence
need not be biased against recognition of assets or income relative to
recognition of liabilities or expenses. Such bias is inconsistent with
neutrality—the attribute that supports faithful representation and
useful information. [5]
Free from Error

--- Page 128 ---
An information item that is free from error will be a more accurate
(faithful) representation of a financial item. For example, if UBS
(CHE) misstates its loan losses, its financial statements are
misleading and not a faithful representation of its financial results.
However, faithful representation does not imply total freedom from
error. This is because most financial reporting measures involve
estimates of various types that incorporate management’s judgment.
For example, management must estimate the amount of uncollectible
accounts to determine bad debt expense. And determination of
depreciation expense requires estimation of useful lives of plant and
equipment, as well as the residual value of the assets.

--- Page 129 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Unfaithful—For 20 Years
The importance of faithful representation is illustrated by the
fraud at Olympus Corporation (JPN). Here’s what happened, as
revealed in the report on the fraud by an investigative committee.
In transactions dating back nearly 20 years, Olympus was hiding
losses related to export sales. The losses arose when the exchange
rate between the dollar and yen moved in an unfavorable direction
for Olympus, which negatively impacted investments related to the
export sales. However, the losses were not reported; that is, the
financial statements were not faithful representations.
How could such a loss be hidden? At the time, accounting rules in
Japan, as well as in other countries, allowed investments to be
carried at cost. Theoretically, there should eventually have been a
write-down, but there never was. Rather, management hoped that
with additional risky investments, the losses could somehow be
made up. They were not, and eventually the losses grew to more
than $1 billion. Olympus seems to have been content to sit on the
losses until 1997, when accounting rules changed and some
investments had to be marked to market.
Olympus then dug the hole deeper; it developed a plan to “sell” the
losing investments, at original cost, to shell companies set up by
Olympus for that purpose. Under lenient accounting rules, those
shell companies would not have to be consolidated with Olympus,
so the losses could remain hidden. That all ended when the
investigation uncovered the sham adjustments and the losses were
finally revealed.
The scandal and the recent case of opaque accounting for goodwill
and impairments at Carillion (GBR) highlight the importance of
accounting rules that result in faithful representation of company
performance and financial position. That is, until accounting rule-
makers finally started to require fair value accounting for some
financial instruments in 1997—seven years after the Olympus

--- Page 130 ---
fraud began—covering up the losses was easy. Furthermore,
subsequent rule changes (in the wake of the Enron (USA)
scandal) forced companies to stop hiding losses in off-balance-
sheet entities. Indeed, the Olympus scandal might never have
occurred if the accounting had kept a focus on faithful
representation.
Sources: F. Norris, “Deep Roots of Fraud at Olympus,” The New York Times
(December 8, 2011); and J. Ford, “Carillion’s Troubles Were Shrouded in a Fog of
Goodwill,” Financial Times (June 17, 2018).
Enhancing Qualities
Enhancing qualitative characteristics are complementary to the
fundamental qualitative characteristics. These characteristics
distinguish more useful information from less useful information.
Enhancing characteristics, shown in the following diagram, are
comparability, verifiability, timeliness, and understandability.
Comparability
Information that is measured and reported in a similar manner for
different companies is considered comparable. Comparability
enables users to identify the real similarities and differences in
economic events between companies. For example, historically, the
accounting for pensions in Japan differed from that in the United
States. In Japan, companies generally recorded little or no charge to
income for these costs. U.S. companies recorded pension cost as

--- Page 131 ---
incurred. As a result, it is difficult to compare the financial results of
Toyota (JPN) or Honda (JPN) to General Motors (USA) or Ford
(USA). Investors can only make valid evaluations if comparable
information is available.
Another type of comparability, consistency, is present when a
company applies the same accounting treatment to similar events,
from period to period. Through such application, the company shows
consistent use of accounting standards. The idea of consistency does
not mean, however, that companies cannot switch from one
accounting method to another. A company can change methods, but it
must first demonstrate that the newly adopted method is preferable to
the old. If deemed appropriate by the auditor, the company must then
disclose the nature and effect of the accounting change, as well as the
justification for it, in the financial statements for the period in which
it made the change.4 When a change in accounting principles occurs,
the auditor generally refers to it in an explanatory paragraph of the
audit report. This paragraph identifies the nature of the change and
refers the reader to the note in the financial statements that discusses
the change in detail.
Verifiability
Verifiability means that different knowledgeable and independent
observers could reach consensus, although not necessarily complete
agreement, that a particular depiction is a faithful representation. [6]
Verifiability occurs in the following situations.
1. Two independent auditors count Tata Motors’ (IND) inventory
and arrive at the same physical quantity amount for inventory.
Verification of an amount for an asset therefore can occur by
simply counting the inventory (referred to as direct verification).
2. Two independent auditors compute Tata Motors’ inventory value
at the end of the year using the FIFO method of inventory
valuation. Verification may occur by checking the inputs
(quantity and costs) and recalculating the outputs (ending

--- Page 132 ---
inventory value) using the same accounting convention or
methodology (referred to as indirect verification).
Timeliness
Timeliness means having information available to decision-makers
before it loses its capacity to influence decisions. Having relevant
information available sooner can enhance its capacity to influence
decisions, and a lack of timeliness can rob information of its
usefulness. For example, if Lenovo Group (CHN) waited to report
its interim results until nine months after the period, the information
would be much less useful for decision-making purposes.
Understandability
Decision-makers vary widely in the types of decisions they make, how
they make decisions, the information they already possess or can
obtain from other sources, and their ability to process the
information. For information to be useful, there must be a connection
(linkage) between these users and the decisions they make. This link,
understandability, is the quality of information that lets reasonably
informed users see its significance. Understandability is enhanced
when information is classified, characterized, and presented clearly
and concisely.
For example, assume that Tomkins plc (GBR) issues a three-
months’ report that shows interim earnings have declined
significantly. This interim report provides relevant and faithfully
represented information for decision-making purposes. Some users,
upon reading the report, decide to sell their shares. Other users,
however, do not understand the report’s content and significance.
They are surprised when Tomkins declares a smaller year-end
dividend and the share price declines. Thus, although Tomkins
presented highly relevant information that was a faithful
representation, it was useless to those who did not understand it.
Users of financial reports are assumed to have a reasonable
knowledge of business and economic activities. In making decisions,

--- Page 133 ---
users also should review and analyze the information with reasonable
diligence. Information that is relevant and faithfully represented
should not be excluded from financial reports solely because it is too
complex or difficult for some users to understand without assistance.
[7]

--- Page 134 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Show Me the Earnings!
Some young technology companies, in an effort to attract investors
who will help them strike it rich, are using unconventional
financial terms in their financial reports. As an example, instead of
revenue, these privately held companies use terms such as
“bookings,” annual recurring revenues, or other numbers that
often exceed actual revenue.
Hortonworks Inc. (a U.S. software company) is a classic
illustration. It forecast in March 2014 that it would have a strong
$100 million in billings by year-end. It turns out the company was
not talking about revenues but rather a non-U.S. GAAP number
(referred to as an alternative performance measure, or APM) that
it uses to gauge future business. This number looked a lot smaller
after Hortonworks went public and reported financial results—just
$46 million in revenues, as shown in the following chart.
Another example is Uber Technologies (the sometimes
controversial U.S. ride service). Uber noted that it was on target to
reach $10 billion in bookings for 2014. Uber defines bookings as
total fares paid by customers. But Uber keeps little of the money

--- Page 135 ---
from these bookings. As shown in the following chart, Uber gets
only 25 cents on each $1 of bookings.
Now that Uber is a public company, it would report the 25 cents as
revenues, not the one dollar. Similar income reporting disconnects
were apparent at Lululemon (CAN), which showed gains in its
store openings and top line (sales) but not a corresponding
increase in profit margin.
Given these examples, it is understandable that standard-setters
have increased their scrutiny of the reporting of APMs. The lesson
for investors: Keep an eye on verifiable and comparable financial
measures of performance and be sure to count expenses and net
income according to IFRS. Using gross measures such as billings,
recurring revenues, or some non-financial measures, and APMs to
determine success may be hazardous to your financial health.
Sources: Telis Demos, Shira Ovide, and Susan Pulliam, “Tech Startups Play Numbers
Game,” Wall Street Journal (June 10, 2015), pp. A1 and A12; L. Beilfuss, “Lululemon
Sales Rise, Gross Margin Declines,” Wall Street Journal (September 10, 2015); and
PwC, “Alternative Performance Measures—Better Described as ‘Profits Before
Unfortunate Debits’?” IFRS News (March 2016).
Basic Elements
An important aspect of developing any theoretical structure is the
body of basic elements or definitions to be included in it.

--- Page 136 ---
Accounting uses many terms with distinctive and specific meanings.
These terms constitute the language of business or the jargon of
accounting.
One such term is asset. Is it merely something we own? Or is an asset
something we have the right to use, as in the case of leased
equipment? Or is it anything of value used by a company to generate
revenues—in which case, should we also consider the managers of a
company as an asset?
As this example and the lottery ticket example in the opening story
illustrate, it is necessary, therefore, to develop basic definitions for the
elements of financial statements. The Conceptual Framework defines
the five interrelated elements that most directly relate to measuring
the performance and financial status of a business enterprise. We list
them below for review and information purposes; you need not
memorize these definitions at this point. We will explain and examine
each of these elements in more detail in subsequent chapters.

--- Page 137 ---
Elements of Financial Statements
The elements directly related to the measurement of financial
position are assets, liabilities, and equity. These are defined as
follows.
Asset. A present economic resource controlled by the entity as a
result of past events. (An economic resource is a right that has the
potential to produce economic benefits).
Liability. A present obligation of the entity to transfer an
economic resource as a result of past events.
Equity. The residual interest in the assets of the entity after
deducting all its liabilities.
The elements of income and expenses are defined as follows.
Income. Increases in assets, or decreases in liabilities, that result
in increases in equity, other than those relating to contributions
from holders of equity claims.
Expenses. Decreases in assets, or increases in liabilities, that
result in decreases in equity, other than those relating to
distributions to holders of equity claims.
As indicated, the IASB classifies the elements into two distinct groups.
[8] The first group of three elements—assets, liabilities, and equity—
describes amounts of resources and claims to resources at a moment
in time. The second group of two elements describes transactions,
events, and circumstances that affect a company during a period of
time. The first group, affected by elements of the second group,
provides at any time the cumulative result of all changes. This
interaction is referred to as “articulation.” That is, key figures in one
financial statement correspond to balances in another.
Assumptions

--- Page 138 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Review the basic assumptions of accounting.
The third level of the Conceptual Framework consists of concepts that
implement the basic objectives of level one. These concepts explain
how companies should recognize, measure, and report financial
elements and events. Here, we identify the concepts as basic
assumptions, principles, and a cost constraint. Not everyone uses this
classification system, so focus your attention more on
understanding the concepts than on how we classify and organize
them. These concepts serve as guidelines in responding to
controversial financial reporting issues.
As indicated earlier, the Conceptual Framework specifically identifies
only one assumption—the going concern assumption. Yet, we believe
there are a number of other assumptions that are present in the
reporting environment. As a result, for completeness, we discuss each
of these five basic assumptions in turn: (1) economic entity, (2)
going concern, (3) monetary unit, (4) periodicity, and (5)
accrual basis.
Economic Entity Assumption
The economic entity assumption means that economic
activity can be identified with a particular unit of
accountability. In other words, a company keeps its activity separate
and distinct from its owners and any other business unit. At the most
basic level, the economic entity assumption dictates that Sappi
Limited (ZAF) record the company’s financial activities separately
from those of its owners and managers. Equally important, financial
statement users need to be able to distinguish the activities and
elements of different companies, such as Volvo (SWE), Ford (USA),
and Volkswagen AG (DEU). If users could not distinguish the
activities of different companies, how would they know which
company financially outperformed the other?

--- Page 139 ---
The entity concept does not apply solely to the segregation of activities
among competing companies, such as Toyota (JPN) and Hyundai
(KOR). An individual, department, division, or an entire industry
could be considered a separate entity if we choose to define it in this
manner. Thus, the entity concept does not necessarily refer to a
legal entity. A parent company and its subsidiaries are separate legal
entities, but merging their activities for accounting and reporting
purposes does not violate the economic entity assumption.5 [9]
Going Concern Assumption
Most accounting methods rely on the going concern assumption
—that the company will have a long life. Despite numerous
business failures, most companies have a fairly high continuance rate.
As a rule, we expect companies to last long enough to fulfill their
objectives and commitments.
This assumption has significant implications. The historical cost
principle would be of limited usefulness if we assumed eventual
liquidation. Under a liquidation approach, for example, a company
would better state asset values at fair value than at acquisition cost.
Depreciation and amortization policies are justifiable and
appropriate only if we assume some permanence to the
company. If a company adopts the liquidation approach, the
current/non-current classification of assets and liabilities loses much
of its significance. Labeling anything a long-lived or non-current asset
would be difficult to justify. Indeed, listing liabilities on the basis of
priority in liquidation would be more reasonable.
The going concern assumption applies in most business situations.
Only where liquidation appears imminent is the assumption
inapplicable. In these cases, a total revaluation of assets and
liabilities can provide information that closely approximates the
company’s fair value. You will learn more about accounting problems
related to a company in liquidation in advanced accounting courses.
[10]
Monetary Unit Assumption

--- Page 140 ---
The monetary unit assumption means that money is the common
denominator of economic activity and provides an appropriate basis
for accounting measurement and analysis. That is, the monetary unit
is the most effective means of expressing to interested parties changes
in capital and exchanges of goods and services. Application of this
assumption depends on the even more basic assumption that
quantitative data are useful in communicating economic information
and in making rational economic decisions.
Furthermore, accounting generally ignores price-level changes
(inflation and deflation) and assumes that the unit of measure—
euros, dollars, or yen—remains reasonably stable. We therefore use
the monetary unit assumption to justify adding 1985 pounds to 2015
pounds sterling without any adjustment. It is expected that the pound
or other currency, unadjusted for inflation or deflation, will continue
to be used to measure items recognized in financial statements. Only
if circumstances change dramatically (such as high inflation rates
similar to that in some South American countries) will “inflation
accounting” be considered.6
Periodicity Assumption
To measure the results of a company’s activity accurately, we would
need to wait until it liquidates. Decision-makers, however, cannot wait
that long for such information. Users need to know a company’s
performance and economic status on a timely basis so that they can
evaluate and compare companies, and take appropriate actions.
Therefore, companies must report information periodically. [13]
The periodicity (or time period) assumption implies that a
company can divide its economic activities into artificial time periods.
These time periods vary, but the most common are monthly,
quarterly, and yearly.
The shorter the time period, the more difficult it is to determine the
proper net income for the period. A month’s results usually prove less
reliable than a quarter’s results, and a quarter’s results are likely to be
less reliable than a year’s results. Investors desire and demand that a
company quickly process and disseminate information. Yet the

--- Page 141 ---
quicker a company releases the information, the more likely the
information will include errors. This phenomenon provides an
interesting example of the trade-off between relevance and
faithful representation in preparing financial data.
The problem of defining the time period becomes more serious as
product cycles shorten and products become obsolete more quickly.
Many believe that, given technology advances, companies need to
provide more online, real-time financial information to ensure the
availability of relevant information.
Accrual Basis of Accounting
Companies prepare financial statements using the accrual basis of
accounting. Accrual-basis accounting means that transactions
that change a company’s financial statements are recorded in the
periods in which the events occur. [14] For example, using the accrual
basis means that companies recognize revenues when they satisfy a
performance obligation (the revenue recognition principle). This is in
contrast to recognition based on receipt of cash. Likewise, under the
accrual basis, companies recognize expenses when incurred (the
expense recognition principle) rather than when paid.
An alternative to the accrual basis is the cash basis. Under cash-basis
accounting, companies record revenue only when cash is received.
They record expenses only when cash is paid. The cash basis of
accounting is prohibited under IFRS. Why? Because it does not record
revenue according to the revenue recognition principle (discussed in
the next section). Similarly, under the cash basis companies do not
record expenses when incurred, which violates the expense
recognition principle (discussed in the next section).
Financial statements prepared on the accrual basis inform users not
only of past transactions involving the payment and receipt of cash
but also of obligations to pay cash in the future and of resources that
represent cash to be received in the future. Hence, they provide the
type of information about past transactions and other events that is
most useful in making economic decisions.

--- Page 142 ---
Measurement, Recognition, and Disclosure
Concepts
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Explain the application of the basic principles of accounting.
Basic Principles of Accounting
We generally use four basic principles of accounting to record and
report transactions: (1) measurement, (2) revenue recognition, (3)
expense recognition, and (4) full disclosure. We look at each in turn.
Measurement Principles
We presently have a “mixed-attribute” system in which one of two
measurement principles is used. The most commonly used
measurements are based on historical cost and current cost. Selection
of which principle to follow generally reflects a trade-off between
relevance and faithful representation. Here, we discuss each
measurement principle.
Historical Cost
IFRS requires that companies account for and report many assets and
liabilities on the basis of acquisition price. This is often referred to as
the historical cost principle. Cost has an important advantage over
other valuations: It is generally thought to be a faithful
representation of the amount paid for a given item.
To illustrate this advantage, consider the problems if companies select
current selling price instead. Companies might have difficulty
establishing a value for unsold items. Every member of the accounting
department might value the assets differently. Further, how often
would it be necessary to establish sales value? All companies close
their accounts at least annually. But some compute their net income
every month. Those companies would have to place a sales value on

--- Page 143 ---
every asset each time they wished to determine income. Critics raise
similar objections against current cost (replacement cost, present
value of future cash flows) and any other basis of valuation except
historical cost.
What about liabilities? Do companies account for them on a cost
basis? Yes, they do. Companies issue liabilities, such as bonds, notes,
and accounts payable, in exchange for assets (or services), for an
agreed-upon price. This price, established by the exchange
transaction, is the “cost” of the liability. A company uses this
amount to record the liability in the accounts and report it in financial
statements. Thus, many users prefer historical cost because it
provides them with a verifiable benchmark for measuring
historical trends. [15]
Current Value
Current value measures provide monetary information about assets,
liabilities, and related income and expenses, using information
updated to reflect conditions at the measurement date. Because of the
updating, current values of assets and liabilities reflect changes in
amounts since the previous measurement date. Current value bases
include:
1. Fair value.
2. Value in use for assets and fulfillment value for liabilities.
3. Current cost. [16]
Fair Value
Fair value is defined as “the price that would be received to sell an
asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between
market participants at the measurement date.” Fair value is therefore
a market-based measure. [17] Recently, IFRS has increasingly called
for use of fair value measurements in the financial statements. This is
often referred to as the fair value principle. Fair value information

--- Page 144 ---
may be more useful than historical cost for certain types of assets and
liabilities and in certain industries. For example, companies report
many financial instruments, including derivatives, at fair value.
Certain industries, such as brokerage houses and mutual funds,
prepare their basic financial statements on a fair value basis. At initial
acquisition, historical cost equals fair value. In subsequent periods, as
market and economic conditions change, historical cost and fair value
often diverge. Thus, fair value measures or estimates often provide
more relevant information about the expected future cash flows
related to the asset or liability. For example, when long-lived assets
decline in value, a fair value measure determines any impairment
loss.
The IASB believes that fair value information in some circumstances
is more relevant to users than historical cost. In these cases, fair value
measurement provides better insight into the value of a company’s
assets and liabilities (its financial position) and a better basis for
assessing future cash flow prospects. The IASB provides an option to
use fair value (referred to as the fair value option) as the basis for
measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities. [18] The
primary purpose of this option is to increase the relevance of the
accounting information by eliminating cases where an accounting
mismatch is created by using a different measurement method. As a
result, companies now have the option to record fair value in their
accounts for most financial instruments, including such items as
receivables, investments, and debt securities.
Use of fair value in financial reporting is increasing. However,
measurement based on fair value introduces increased subjectivity
into accounting reports when fair value information is not readily
available. To increase consistency and comparability in fair value
measures, the IASB established a fair value hierarchy that provides
insight into the priority of valuation techniques to use to determine
fair value. As shown in Illustration 2.4, the fair value hierarchy is
divided into three broad levels.

--- Page 145 ---
ILLUSTRATION 2.4 Fair Value Hierarchy
As Illustration 2.4 indicates, Level 1 is the least subjective because it is
based on quoted prices, like a closing share price in the Financial
Times. Level 2 is more subjective and would rely on evaluating similar
assets or liabilities in active markets. At the most subjective level,
Level 3, much judgment is needed, based on the best information
available, to arrive at a relevant and representationally faithful fair
value measurement.7
It is easy to arrive at fair values when markets are liquid with many
traders, but fair value answers are not readily available in other
situations. For example, how do you value the mortgage assets of a
subprime lender such as New Century (USA) given that the market
for these securities has essentially disappeared? A great deal of
expertise and sound judgment will be needed to arrive at appropriate
answers. IFRS also provides guidance on estimating fair values when
market-related data are not available. In general, these valuation
issues relate to Level 3 fair value measurements. These
measurements may be developed using expected cash flow and
present value techniques, as described in Chapter 6.
Value in Use / Fulfillment Value
Value in use is the present value of the cash flows, or other
economic benefits that a company expects to derive from the use of
an asset and from its ultimate disposal. Fulfillment value is the
present value of the cash, or other economic resources that a company
expects to be obliged to transfer as it fulfills a liability. Value in
use and fulfillment value cannot be observed directly and are

--- Page 146 ---
determined using cash-flow-based measurement techniques. Value in
use and fulfillment value reflect the same factors described for fair
value but from a company-specific perspective rather than from a
market-participant perspective.
Current Cost
The current cost of an asset is the cost of an equivalent asset at the
measurement date, comprising the consideration that would be paid
at the measurement date plus the transaction costs that would be
incurred at that date. The current cost of a liability is the
consideration that would be received for an equivalent liability at the
measurement date minus the transaction costs that would be incurred
at that date. Similar to historical cost, current cost is an entry value: It
reflects prices in the market in which the company would acquire the
asset or would incur the liability. As a result, current cost is
distinguished from fair value, value in use, and fulfillment value,
which are exit values.
However, unlike historical cost, current cost reflects conditions at the
measurement date. Current cost frequently cannot be determined
directly by observing prices in an active market and must be
determined indirectly by other means. For example, if prices are
available only for new assets, the current cost of a used asset might
need to be estimated by adjusting the current price of a new asset to
reflect the current age and condition of the asset held by the entity.8
Summary
As indicated above, we presently have a “mixed-attribute” system that
permits the use of both historical cost and current value. Although the
historical cost principle continues to be an important basis for
valuation, recording and reporting of current (fair value) information
is increasing. How do we determine which measurement basis should
be used? In many cases, IFRSs specify which basis should be used.
For instance, inventory is generally recorded at cost unless it is
obsolete or the value is impaired. As a general principle, the choice

--- Page 147 ---
should result in the most useful information. That is, the
measurement basis selected should provide relevant information that
faithfully represents the event or transaction. The recent
measurement and disclosure guidance should increase consistency
and comparability when current (fair) value measurements are used
in the financial statements and related notes.9
Recognition
Recognition is the process of capturing for inclusion in the
statement of financial position or the statement(s) of financial
performance an item that meets the definition of one of the elements
of financial statements—an asset, a liability, equity, income, or
expenses. [20] Recognition involves depicting the item in one of
those statements—either alone or in aggregation with other items—in
words and by a monetary amount, and including that amount in one
or more totals in that statement. The amount at which an asset, a
liability, or equity is recognized in the statement of financial position
is referred to as its “carrying amount.” Two important recognition
principles relate to revenue and expense recognition.10
Revenue Recognition Principle
When a company agrees to perform a service or sell a product to a
customer, it has a performance obligation. When the company
satisfies this performance obligation, it recognizes revenue. The
revenue recognition principle therefore requires that companies
recognize revenue in the accounting period in which the performance
obligation is satisfied.
To illustrate, assume that Klinke Cleaners cleans clothing on June 30
but customers do not claim and pay for their clothes until the first
week of July. Klinke should record revenue in June when it performed
the service (satisfied the performance obligation) rather than in July
when it received the cash. At June 30, Klinke would report a
receivable on its statement of financial position and revenue in its
income statement for the service performed. To illustrate the revenue
recognition principle in more detail, assume that Airbus (DEU) signs

--- Page 148 ---
a contract to sell airplanes to British Airways (GBR) for €100
million. To determine when to recognize revenue, Airbus uses the five
steps shown in Illustration 2.5.11
ILLUSTRATION 2.5 The Five Steps of Revenue Recognition
Many revenue transactions pose few problems because the
transaction is initiated and completed at the same time. However,

--- Page 149 ---
when to recognize revenue in other certain situations is often more
difficult. The risk of errors and misstatements is significant. Chapter
18 discusses revenue recognition issues in more detail.
Expense Recognition Principle
Expenses are defined as outflows or other “using up” of assets or
incurring of liabilities (or a combination of both) during a period as a
result of delivering or producing goods and/or rendering services. It
follows, then, that recognition of expenses is related to net changes in
assets and earning revenues. In practice, the approach for recognizing
expenses is, “Let the expense follow the revenues.” This approach is
the expense recognition principle.
To illustrate, companies recognize expenses not when they pay wages
or make a product, but when the work (service) or the product
actually contributes to revenue. Thus, companies tie expense
recognition to revenue recognition. That is, by matching efforts
(expenses) with accomplishment (revenues), the expense
recognition principle is implemented in accordance with the
definition of expense (outflows or other using up of assets or
incurring of liabilities).12
Some costs, however, are difficult to associate with revenue. As a
result, some other approach must be developed. Often, companies use
a “rational and systematic” allocation policy to apply the expense
recognition principle. This type of expense recognition involves
assumptions about the benefits that a company receives as well as the
cost associated with those benefits. For example, a company like
Nokia (FIN) allocates the cost of equipment over all of the
accounting periods during which it uses the asset because the asset
contributes to the generation of revenue throughout its useful life.
Companies charge some costs to the current period as expenses (or
losses) simply because they cannot determine a connection with
revenue. Examples of these types of costs are officers’ salaries and
other administrative expenses.

--- Page 150 ---
Costs are generally classified into two groups: product costs and
period costs. Product costs, such as material, labor, and overhead,
attach to the product. Companies carry these costs into future periods
if they recognize the revenue from the product in subsequent periods.
Period costs, such as officers’ salaries and other administrative
expenses, attach to the period. Companies charge off such costs in the
immediate period, even though benefits associated with these costs
may occur in the future. Why? Because companies cannot determine a
direct relationship between period costs and revenue. Illustration
2.6 summarizes these expense recognition procedures.
Type of Cost
Relationship
Recognition
Product costs:
Material
Labor
Overhead
Direct relationship
between cost and
revenue.
Recognize in period of
revenue (matching).
Period costs:
Salaries
Administrative
costs
No direct relationship
between cost and
revenue.
Expense as incurred.
ILLUSTRATION 2.6 Expense Recognition Procedures for
Product and Period Costs
Full Disclosure Principle
In deciding what information to report, companies follow the general
practice of providing information that is of sufficient importance to
influence the judgment and decisions of an informed user. Often
referred to as the full disclosure principle, this practice recognizes
that the nature and amount of information included in financial
reports reflects a series of judgmental trade-offs. These trade-offs
strive for (1) sufficient detail to disclose matters that make a

--- Page 151 ---
difference to users, yet (2) sufficient condensation to make the
information understandable, keeping in mind costs of preparing
and using it.
Users find information about financial position, income, cash flows,
and investments in one of three places: (1) within the main body of
financial statements, (2) in the notes to those statements, or (3) as
supplementary information.
As discussed in Chapter 1, the financial statements are the
statement of financial position, income statement (or statement of
comprehensive income), statement of cash flows, and statement of
changes in equity. They are a structured means of communicating
financial information. As discussed earlier, an item that meets the
definition of an element should be recognized in the financial
statements. In situations in which an element is not recognized in the
financial statements (for example, due to existence or measurement
uncertainty), the company may provide information relevant to the
item through disclosure in the notes. [22]
Disclosure is not a substitute for proper accounting. As a noted
accountant indicated, “Good disclosure does not cure bad accounting
any more than an adjective or adverb can be used without, or in place
of, a noun or verb.” Thus, for example, cash-basis accounting for cost
of goods sold is misleading, even if a company discloses accrual-basis
amounts in the notes to the financial statements.
The notes to financial statements generally amplify or explain the
items presented in the main body of the statements. If the main body
of the financial statements gives an incomplete picture of the
performance and position of the company, the notes should provide
the additional information needed. Information in the notes does not
have to be quantifiable, nor does it need to qualify as an element.
Notes can be partially or totally narrative. Examples of notes include
descriptions of the accounting policies and methods used in
measuring the elements reported in the statements, explanations of
uncertainties and contingencies, and statistics and details too
voluminous for presentation in the financial statements. The notes

--- Page 152 ---
can be essential to understanding the company’s performance and
position.
Supplementary information may include details or amounts that
present a different perspective from that adopted in the financial
statements. It may be quantifiable information that is high in
relevance but low in reliability. For example, oil and gas companies
typically provide information on proven reserves as well as the related
discounted cash flows.
Supplementary information may also include management’s
explanation of the financial information and its discussion of the
significance of that information. For example, many business
combinations have produced financing arrangements that demand
new accounting and reporting practices and principles. In each of
these situations, the same problem must be faced: making sure the
company presents enough information to ensure that the reasonably
prudent investor will not be misled.13
We discuss the content, arrangement, and display of financial
statements, along with other facets of full disclosure, in Chapters 4, 5,
and 24.
Cost Constraint
In providing information with the qualitative characteristics that
make it useful, companies must consider an overriding factor that
limits (constrains) the reporting. This is referred to as the cost
constraint. That is, companies must weigh the costs of providing the
information against the benefits that can be derived from using it.
Rule-making bodies and governmental agencies use cost-benefit
analysis before making final their informational requirements. In
order to justify requiring a particular measurement or disclosure, the
benefits perceived to be derived from it must exceed the costs
perceived to be associated with it. [23]
A company executive made the following remark to a standard-setter
about a proposed rule: “In all my years in the financial arena, I have
never seen such an absolutely ridiculous proposal…. To dignify these

--- Page 153 ---
‘actuarial’ estimates by recording them as assets and liabilities would
be virtually unthinkable except for the fact that the FASB has done
equally stupid things in the past…. For God’s sake, use common sense
just this once.”14 Although extreme, this remark indicates the
frustration expressed by members of the business community about
accounting standard-setting, and whether the benefits of a given
pronouncement exceed the costs.
The difficulty in cost-benefit analysis is that the costs and especially
the benefits are not always evident or measurable. The costs are of
several kinds: costs of collecting and processing, of disseminating, of
auditing, of potential litigation, of disclosure to competitors, and of
analysis and interpretation. Benefits to preparers may include greater
management control and access to capital at a lower cost. Users may
receive better information for allocation of resources, tax assessment,
and rate regulation. As noted earlier, benefits are generally more
difficult to quantify than are costs.
The implementation of the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in
the United States illustrates the challenges in assessing costs and
benefits of standards. One study estimated the increased costs of
complying with the new internal-control standards related to the
financial reporting process to be an average of $7.8 million per
company. However, the study concluded that “… quantifying the
benefits of improved more reliable financial reporting is not fully
possible.”15
Despite the difficulty in assessing the costs and benefits of its rules,
the IASB attempts to determine that each proposed pronouncement
will fill a significant need and that the costs imposed to meet the
standard are justified in relation to overall benefits of the resulting
information. In addition, they seek input on costs and benefits as part
of their due process.

--- Page 154 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Let’s Be Prudent
Historically, it has been acceptable practice to invoke the
additional constraint of prudence or conservatism as a justification
for an accounting treatment under conditions of uncertainty.
Prudence or conservatism means the exercise of caution when
making decisions under conditions of uncertainty. However, the
Conceptual Framework, when updated in 2010, indicated that
prudence or conservatism is generally in conflict with the quality
of neutrality. This is because being prudent or conservative can
lead to bias in the reported financial position and financial
performance. In fact, introducing biased understatement of assets
(or overstatement of liabilities) in one period frequently leads to
overstating financial performance in later periods—a result that
cannot be described as prudent. This is inconsistent with
neutrality, which encompasses freedom from bias. Accordingly,
the Conceptual Framework issued in 2010 did not include
prudence or conservatism as desirable qualities of financial
reporting information.
The IASB heard many calls to bring prudence back into the
Conceptual Framework, arguing that prudence is one of the most
important tenets of accounting. The IASB was persuaded by
arguments that prudence can actually help achieve neutrality
when selecting and applying accounting policies. As a result, the
IASB reintroduced the term “prudence,” describing it in the 2018
Conceptual Framework as “cautious prudence,” which it says is
“the exercise of caution when making judgments under conditions
of uncertainty.” The Board hoped that would satisfy stakeholders.
“The previous conceptual framework led a lot of people to believe
that the Board did not think prudence to be important,” said Hans
Hoogervorst, IASB Chair. “And I think in the new conceptual
framework, that confusion will be gone.”

--- Page 155 ---
Sources: Peter Hogarth, “Dear Prudence,” PricewaterhouseCoopers blog,
pwc.blogs.com/ifrs/2015/06/dear-prudence.html (June 3, 2015); and H. Hoogervorst,
“IASB Completes Revisions to Its Conceptual Framework,” (IASB, March 29, 2018).
Summary of the Structure
Illustration 2.7 presents the Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting discussed in this chapter. It is similar to Illustration 2.1
except that it provides additional information for each level. We
cannot overemphasize the usefulness of this conceptual framework in
helping to understand many of the problem areas that we examine in
later chapters.

--- Page 156 ---
ILLUSTRATION 2.7 Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accrual-basis accounting
assumptions

--- Page 157 ---
basic elements
comparability
completeness
conceptual framework
confirmatory value
conservatism
consistency
cost constraint
current cost
current value
decision-useful
economic entity assumption
expense recognition principle
fair value
fair value option
fair value principle
faithful representation
free from error
full disclosure principle
fulfillment value
going concern assumption
historical cost principle
management stewardship
materiality
monetary unit assumption
neutrality

--- Page 158 ---
notes to financial statements
objective of financial reporting
period costs
periodicity (or time period) assumption
predictive value
principles of accounting
product costs
prudence
qualitative characteristics
recognition
relevant
revenue recognition principle
supplementary information
timeliness
understandability
value in use
verifiability
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the usefulness of a conceptual framework and
the objective of financial reporting.
The accounting profession needs a conceptual framework to: (1) build
on and relate to an established body of concepts and objectives, (2)
provide a framework for solving new and emerging practical problems,
(3) increase financial statement users’ understanding of and
confidence in financial reporting, and (4) enhance comparability
among companies’ financial statements. The IASB’s conceptual

--- Page 159 ---
framework, The Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, is
described in one document.
The objective of general-purpose financial reporting is to provide
financial information about the reporting entity that is useful to
present and potential equity investors, lenders, and other
creditors in making decisions about providing resources to the
entity. Those decisions involve buying, selling, or holding equity and
debt instruments, and providing or settling loans and other forms of
credit. Information that is decision-useful to capital providers may
also be helpful to other users of financial reporting who are not capital
providers.
2 Identify the qualitative characteristics of accounting
information and the basic elements of financial
statements.
The overriding criterion by which accounting choices can be judged is
decision-usefulness—that is, providing information that is most
useful for decision-making. Relevance and faithful representation are
the two fundamental qualities that make information decision-useful.
Relevant information makes a difference in a decision by having
predictive or confirmatory value and by being material. Faithful
representation is characterized by completeness, neutrality, and being
free from error. Enhancing qualities of useful information are: (1)
comparability, (2) verifiability, (3) timeliness, and (4)
understandability.
The basic elements of financial statements are: (1) assets, (2)
liabilities, (3) equity, (4) income, and (5) expenses. We define these
elements in the “Elements of Financial Statements” box in the
chapter.
3 Review the basic assumptions of accounting.
Five basic assumptions underlying financial accounting are as follows.
(1) Economic entity: The activity of a company can be kept separate

--- Page 160 ---
and distinct from its owners and any other business unit. (2) Going
concern: Without information to the contrary, the company will have
a long life. (3) Monetary unit: Money is the common denominator by
which economic activity is conducted, and the monetary unit provides
an appropriate basis for measurement and analysis. (4) Periodicity:
The economic activities of a company can be divided into artificial
time periods. (5) Accrual basis: Transactions that change a company’s
financial statements are recorded in the periods in which the events
occur, rather than when cash is paid or received.
4 Explain the application of the basic principles of
accounting.
(1) Measurement principle: IFRS requires the use of historical cost or
fair value depending on the situation. Although the historical cost
principle (measurement based on acquisition price) continues to be
an important basis for valuation, recording and reporting of fair value
information is increasing. (2) Revenue recognition principle: A
company generally recognizes revenue when it satisfies a performance
obligation. (3) Expense recognition principle: As a general rule,
companies recognize expenses when the service or the product
actually makes its contribution to revenue (commonly referred to as
matching). (4) Full disclosure principle: Companies generally provide
information that is of sufficient importance to influence the judgment
and decisions of an informed user.
The cost of providing the information must be weighed against the
benefits that can be derived from using the information.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review
exercises with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem

--- Page 161 ---
Meadow plc has hired you to review its accounting records prior to
the closing of the revenue and expense accounts as of December 31,
the end of the current fiscal year. The following information comes
to your attention.
1. During the current year, Meadow plc changed its policy in
regard to expensing purchases of small tools. In the past, it had
expensed these purchases because they amounted to less than
2% of net income. Now, the president has decided that the
company should follow a policy of capitalization and
subsequent depreciation. It is expected that purchases of small
tools will not fluctuate greatly from year to year.
2. The company constructed a warehouse at a cost of £1,000,000.
It had been depreciating the asset on a straight-line basis over
10 years. In the current year, the controller doubled
depreciation expense because the replacement cost of the
warehouse had increased significantly.
3. When the statement of financial position was prepared, the
preparer omitted detailed information as to the amount of cash
on deposit in each of several banks. Only the total amount of
cash under a caption “Cash in banks” was presented.
4. On July 15 of the current year, Meadow plc purchased an
undeveloped tract of land at a cost of £320,000. The company
spent £80,000 in subdividing the land and getting it ready for
sale. An appraisal of the property at the end of the year
indicated that the land was now worth £500,000. Although
none of the lots were sold, the company recognized revenue of
£180,000, less related expenses of £80,000, for a net income
on the project of £100,000.
5. For a number of years, the company used the FIFO method for
inventory valuation purposes. During the current year, the
president noted that all the other companies in the industry
had switched to the average-cost method. The company decided

--- Page 162 ---
not to switch to average-cost because net income would
decrease £830,000.
Instructions
State whether or not you agree with the decisions made by Meadow
plc. Support your answers with reference, whenever possible, to the
generally accepted principles, assumptions, and cost constraint
applicable in the circumstances.
Solution
1. From the facts, it is difficult to determine whether to agree or
disagree. Consistency, of course, is violated in this situation
although its violation may not be material. Furthermore, the
change of accounting policies regarding the treatment of small
tools cannot be judged good or bad but would depend on the
circumstances. In this case, it seems that the result will be
approximately the same whether the company capitalizes and
expenses, or simply expenses each period, since the purchases are
fairly uniform. Perhaps from a cost standpoint (expediency), it
might be best to continue the present policy rather than become
involved in detailed depreciation schedules, assuming that
purchases remain fairly uniform. On the other hand, the
president may believe there is a significant unrecorded asset that
should be shown on the statement of financial position. If such is
the case, capitalization and subsequent depreciation would be
more appropriate.
2. Disagree. At the present time, accountants do not recognize price
level or current value adjustments in the accounts. Hence, unless
the controller is proposing use of revaluation accounting for all
warehouses, it is misleading to deviate from the historical cost
principle because conjecture or opinion can take place. Also,
depreciation is not so much a matter of valuation as it is a means
of cost allocation. Assets are not depreciated on the basis of a

--- Page 163 ---
decline in their fair value. Rather, they are depreciated on the
basis of a systematic charge of expired cost against revenues.
3. Agree. The full disclosure principle recognizes that reasonable
condensation and summarization of the details of a company’s
operations and financial position are essential to readability and
comprehension. Thus, in determining what is full disclosure, the
accountant must decide whether omission will mislead readers of
the financial statements. Generally, companies present only the
total amount of cash on a statement of financial position unless
some special circumstance is involved (such as a possible
restriction on the use of the cash). In most cases, however, the
company’s presentation would be considered appropriate and in
accordance with the full disclosure principle.
4. Disagree. The historical cost principle indicates that companies
account for assets and liabilities on the basis of cost. If sales value
were selected, for example, it would be extremely difficult to
establish an appraisal value for the given item without selling it.
Note, too, that the revenue recognition principle provides
guidance on when revenue should be recognized. Revenue should
be recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied. In
this case, the revenue was not recognized because the critical
event for satisfying the performance obligation, “sale of the land
with transfer to the buyer,” had not occurred.
5. From the facts, it is difficult to determine whether to agree or
disagree with the president. The president’s approach is not a
violation of any principle. Consistency requires that accounting
entities give accountable events the same accounting treatment
from period to period for a given business enterprise. It says
nothing concerning consistency of accounting principles among
business enterprises. From a comparability viewpoint, it might be
useful to report the information on an average-cost basis. But, as
indicated above, there is no requirement to do so.

--- Page 164 ---
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and
resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. What is a conceptual framework? Why is a conceptual framework
necessary in financial accounting?
2. What is the primary objective of financial reporting?
3. Does management stewardship have a role in the objective of
financial reporting? Explain.
4. What is meant by the term “qualitative characteristics of
accounting information”?
5. Briefly describe the two fundamental qualities of useful accounting
information.
6. How are materiality (and immateriality) related to the proper
presentation of financial statements? What factors and measures
should be considered in assessing the materiality of a misstatement in
the presentation of a financial statement?
7. Your friend (not an accounting major) thinks that prudence in the
Conceptual Framework means being conservative. Do you agree?
Explain.
8. What are the enhancing qualities of the qualitative characteristics?
What is the role of enhancing qualities in the Conceptual Framework?
9. According to the Conceptual Framework, the objective of financial
reporting for business enterprises is based on the needs of the users
of financial statements. Explain the level of sophistication that the
IASB assumes about the users of financial statements.
10. What is the distinction between comparability and consistency?
11. Why is it necessary to develop a definitional framework for the
basic elements of accounting?

--- Page 165 ---
12. What are the basic elements of the Conceptual Framework?
Briefly describe the relationship between the “moment in time” and
“period of time” elements.
13. What are the five basic assumptions that underlie the financial
accounting structure?
14. The life of a business is divided into specific time periods, usually
a year, to measure results of operations for each such time period and
to portray financial conditions at the end of each period.
a. This practice is based on the accounting assumption that the life
of the business consists of a series of time periods and that it is
possible to measure accurately the results of operations for each
period. Comment on the validity and necessity of this
assumption.
b. What has been the effect of this practice on accounting? What is
its relation to the accrual basis of accounting? What influence has
it had on accounting entries and practices?
15. What is the basic accounting problem created by the monetary
unit assumption when there is significant inflation? What appears to
be the IASB position on a stable monetary unit?
16. The chairman of the board of directors of the company for which
you are chief accountant has told you that he has little use for
accounting figures based on historical cost. He believes that fair
values are of far more significance to the board of directors than “out-
of-date costs.” Present some arguments to convince him that
accounting data should still be based on historical cost.
17. Briefly describe the three bases for measuring current value.
18. What is the definition of fair value?
19. What is the fair value option? Explain how use of the fair value
option reflects application of the fair value principle.
20. Briefly describe the fair value hierarchy.
21. Explain the revenue recognition principle.

--- Page 166 ---
22. What is a performance obligation, and how is it used to determine
when revenue should be recognized?
23. What are the five steps used to determine the proper time to
recognize revenue?
24. Selane Eatery operates a catering service specializing in business
luncheons for large companies. Selane requires customers to place
their orders 2 weeks in advance of the scheduled events. Selane bills
its customers on the tenth day of the month following the date of
service and requires that payment be made within 30 days of the
billing date. Conceptually, when should Selane recognize revenue
related to its catering service?
25. Mogilny Company paid $135,000 for a machine. The Accumulated
Depreciation account has a balance of $46,500 at the present time.
The company could sell the machine today for $150,000. The
company president believes that the company has a “right to this
gain.” What does the president mean by this statement? Do you
agree?
26. Three expense recognition methods (associating cause and effect,
systematic and rational allocation, and immediate recognition) were
discussed in the chapter under the expense recognition principle.
Indicate the basic nature of each of these expense recognition
methods and give two examples of each.
27. Under what conditions should an item be recognized in the
financial statements?
28. Briefly describe the types of information concerning financial
position, income, and cash flows that might be provided (a) within the
main body of the financial statements, (b) in the notes to the financial
statements, or (c) as supplementary information.
29. In January 2022, Janeway AG doubled the amount of its
outstanding shares by selling an additional 10,000 shares to finance
an expansion of the business. You propose that this information be
shown by a footnote to the statement of financial position as of
December 31, 2022. The president objects, claiming that this sale took

--- Page 167 ---
place after December 31, 2022, and, therefore, should not be shown.
Explain your position.
30. Describe the major constraint inherent in the presentation of
accounting information.
31. What are some of the costs of providing accounting information?
What are some of the benefits of accounting information? Describe
the cost-benefit factors that should be considered when new
accounting standards are being proposed.
Brief Exercises
BE2.1 (LO 2) Match the qualitative characteristics below with the
following statements.
1. Relevance
2. Faithful representation
3. Predictive value
4. Confirmatory value
5. Comparability
6. Completeness
7. Neutrality
8. Timeliness
a. Quality of information that permits users to identify similarities
in and differences between two sets of economic phenomena.
b. Having information available to users before it loses its capacity
to influence decisions.
c. Information about an economic phenomenon that has value as an
input to the processes used by capital providers to form their own
expectations about the future.
d. Information that is capable of making a difference in the
decisions of users in their capacity as capital providers.

--- Page 168 ---
e. Absence of bias intended to attain a predetermined result or to
induce a particular behavior.
BE2.2 (LO 2) Match the qualitative characteristics below with the
following statements.
1. Timeliness
2. Completeness
3. Free from error
4. Understandability
5. Faithful representation
6. Relevance
7. Neutrality
8. Confirmatory value
a. Quality of information that assures users that information
represents the economic phenomena that it purports to represent.
b. Information about an economic phenomenon that changes past
or present expectations based on previous evaluations.
c. The extent to which information is accurate in representing the
economic substance of a transaction.
d. Includes all the information that is necessary for a faithful
representation of the economic phenomena that it purports to
represent.
e. Quality of information that allows users to comprehend its
meaning.
BE2.3 (LO 2) Discuss whether the changes described in each of the
situations below require recognition in the audit report as to
consistency. (Assume that the amounts are material.)
a. The company changed its inventory method to FIFO from
weighted-average, which had been used in prior years.

--- Page 169 ---
b. The company disposed of one of the two subsidiaries that had
been included in its consolidated statements for prior years.
c. The estimated remaining useful life of plant property was reduced
because of obsolescence.
d. The company is using an inventory valuation method that is
different from those used by all other companies in its industry.
BE2.4 (LO 2) Identify which qualitative characteristic of accounting
information is best described in each of the following items. (Do not
use relevance and faithful representation.)
a. The annual reports of Best Buy Co. (USA) are audited by
certified public accountants.
b. Motorola (USA) and Nokia (FIN) both use the FIFO cost flow
assumption.
c. Starbucks Corporation (USA) has used straight-line
depreciation since it began operations.
d. Heineken Holdings (NLD) issues its quarterly reports
immediately after each quarter ends.
BE2.5 (LO 2) Explain how you would decide whether to record each
of the following expenditures as an asset or an expense. Assume all
items are material.
a. Legal fees paid in connection with the purchase of land are
€1,500.
b. Eduardo SA paves the driveway leading to the office building at a
cost of €21,000.
c. A meat market purchases a meat-grinding machine at a cost of
€3,500.
d. On June 30, Monroe and Meno, medical doctors, pay 6 months’
office rent to cover the month of July and the next 5 months.
e. Smith’s Hardware pays €9,000 in wages to laborers for
construction on a building to be used in the business.

--- Page 170 ---
f. Alvarez’s Florists pays wages of €2,100 for November to an
employee who serves as driver of their delivery truck.
BE2.6 (LO 2) For each item below, indicate to which category of
elements of financial statements it belongs.
a. Retained earnings.
b. Sales.
c. Share Premium.
d. Inventory.
e. Depreciation.
f. Loss on sale of equipment.
g. Interest payable.
h. Dividends.
i. Gain on sale of investment.
j. Issuance of ordinary shares.
BE2.7 (LO 3) If the going concern assumption is not made in
accounting, discuss the differences in the amounts shown in the
financial statements for the following items.
a. Land.
b. Depreciation expense on equipment.
c. Inventory.
d. Prepaid insurance.
BE2.8 (LO 3) Identify which basic assumption of accounting is best
described in each of the following items.
a. The economic activities of FedEx Corporation (USA) are
divided into 12-month periods for the purpose of issuing annual
reports.

--- Page 171 ---
b. Total S.A. (FRA) does not adjust amounts in its financial
statements for the effects of inflation.
c. Barclays (GBR) reports current and non-current classifications
in its statement of financial position.
d. The economic activities of Tokai Rubber Industries (JPN) and
its subsidiaries are merged for accounting and reporting
purposes.
BE2.9 (LO 4) Identify which basic principle of accounting is best
described in each of the following items.
a. Parmalat (ITA) reports revenue in its income statement when it
delivers goods instead of when the cash is collected.
b. Google (USA) recognizes depreciation expense for a machine
over the 2-year period during which that machine helps the
company earn revenue.
c. Oracle Corporation (USA) reports information about pending
lawsuits in the notes to its financial statements.
d. Fuji Film (JPN) reports land on its statement of financial
position at the amount paid to acquire it, even though the
estimated fair value is greater.
BE2.10 (LO 4) Vande Velde Company made three investments
during 2022. (1) It purchased 1,000 shares of Sastre Company, a start-
up company. Vande Velde made the investment based on valuation
estimates from an internally developed model. (2) It purchased 2,000
shares of Fuji Film (JPN), which trades on the Nikkei. (3) It invested
$10,000 in local development authority bonds. Although these bonds
do not trade on an active market, their value closely tracks
movements in U.S. Treasury bonds. Rank these three investments in
terms of the verifiability of fair value.
BE2.11 (LO 2) The following three different transactions relate to
materiality. Explain whether you would classify these transactions as
material.

--- Page 172 ---
a. Blair Co. has reported a positive trend in earnings over the last 3
years. In the current year, it reduces its bad debt expense to
ensure another positive earnings year. The impact of this
adjustment is equal to 3% of net income.
b. Hindi SE has a gain of €3.1 million on the sale of plant assets and
a €3.3 million loss on the sale of investments. It decides to net
the gain and loss because the net effect is considered immaterial.
Hindi SE’s income for the current year was €10 million.
c. Damon SpA expenses all capital equipment under €2,500 on the
basis that it is immaterial. The company has followed this
practice for a number of years.
BE2.12 (LO 3, 4) What accounting assumption, principle, or
constraint would Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR) use in each
of the situations below?
a. M&S records expenses when incurred, rather than when cash is
paid.
b. M&S was involved in litigation over the last year. This litigation is
disclosed in the financial statements.
c. M&S allocates the cost of its depreciable assets over the life it
expects to receive revenue from these assets.
d. M&S records the purchase of a new Lenovo (CHN) PC at its cash
equivalent price.
BE2.13 (LO 1, 2, 4) Fill in the blanks related to the following
statements.
1. Financial reporting imposes __________; the benefits of
financial reporting should justify those __________.
2. The information provided by __________ __________
__________ __________ focuses on the needs of all capital
providers, not just the needs of a particular group.

--- Page 173 ---
3. A depiction of economic phenomena is __________ if it
includes all the information that is necessary for faithful
representation of the economic phenomena that it purports to
represent.
4. __________ is the quality of information that allows users to
comprehend its meaning.
5. __________ is the quality of information that permits users to
identify similarities in and differences between two sets of
economic phenomena.
6. Information about economic phenomena has __________
__________ if it confirms or changes past or present
expectations based on previous evaluations.
Exercises
E2.1 (LO 1) (Usefulness, Objective of Financial Reporting)
Indicate whether the following statements about the Conceptual
Framework are true or false. If false, provide a brief explanation
supporting your position.
a. Accounting rule-making that relies on a body of concepts will
result in useful and consistent pronouncements.
b. General-purpose financial reports are most useful to company
insiders in making strategic business decisions.
c. Accounting standards based on individual conceptual frameworks
generally will result in consistent and comparable accounting
reports.
d. Capital providers are the only users who benefit from general-
purpose financial reporting.
e. Accounting reports should be developed so that users without
knowledge of economics and business can become informed
about the financial results of a company.
f. The objective of financial reporting is the foundation from which
the other aspects of the framework logically result.

--- Page 174 ---
E2.2 (LO 1, 2) (Usefulness, Objective of Financial Reporting,
Qualitative Characteristics) Indicate whether the following
statements about the Conceptual Framework are true or false. If false,
provide a brief explanation supporting your position.
a. The fundamental qualitative characteristics that make accounting
information useful are relevance and verifiability.
b. Relevant information has predictive value, confirmatory value, or
both.
c. Conservatism, a prudent reaction to uncertainty, is considered a
constraint of financial reporting.
d. Information that is a faithful representation is characterized as
having predictive or confirmatory value.
e. Comparability pertains only to the reporting of information in a
similar manner for different companies.
f. Verifiability is solely an enhancing characteristic for faithful
representation.
g. In preparing financial reports, it is assumed that users of the
reports have reasonable knowledge of business and economic
activities.
E2.3 (LO 2, 4) 
 (Qualitative Characteristics) The
Conceptual Framework identifies the qualitative characteristics that
make accounting information useful. Presented below are a number
of questions related to these qualitative characteristics and underlying
constraint.
a. What is the quality of information that enables users to confirm
or correct prior expectations?
b. Identify the overall or pervasive constraint developed in the
Conceptual Framework.
c. A noted accountant once remarked, “If it becomes accepted or
expected that accounting principles are determined or modified in
order to secure purposes other than economic measurement, we

--- Page 175 ---
assume a grave risk that confidence in the credibility of our
financial information system will be undermined.” Which
qualitative characteristic of accounting information should
ensure that such a situation will not occur? (Do not use faithful
representation.)
d. Muruyama Group switches from FIFO to average-cost and then
back to FIFO over a 2-year period. Which qualitative
characteristic of accounting information is not followed?
e. Assume that the profession permits the savings and loan industry
to defer losses on investments it sells, because immediate
recognition of the loss may have adverse economic consequences
on the industry. Which qualitative characteristic of accounting
information is not followed? (Do not use relevance or faithful
representation.)
f. What are the two fundamental qualities that make accounting
information useful for decision-making?
g. Watteau Inc. does not issue its first-quarter report until after the
second quarter’s results are reported. Which qualitative
characteristic of accounting is not followed? (Do not use
relevance.)
h. Predictive value is an ingredient of which of the two fundamental
qualities that make accounting information useful for decision-
making purposes?
i. Duggan, Inc. is the only company in its industry to depreciate its
plant assets on a straight-line basis. Which qualitative
characteristic of accounting information may not be present?
j. Nadal Company has attempted to determine the replacement cost
of its inventory. Three different appraisers arrive at substantially
different amounts for this value. The president, nevertheless,
decides to report the middle value for external reporting
purposes. Which qualitative characteristic of information is
lacking in these data? (Do not use reliability or representational
faithfulness.)

--- Page 176 ---
E2.4 (LO 2) (Qualitative Characteristics) The qualitative
characteristics that make accounting information useful for decision-
making purposes are as follows.
Relevance
Neutrality
Verifiability
Faithful representation Completeness Understandability
Predictive value
Timeliness
Comparability
Confirmatory value
Materiality
Free from error
Instructions
Identify the appropriate qualitative characteristic(s) to be used given
the information provided below.
a. Qualitative characteristic being displayed when companies in the
same industry are using the same accounting principles.
b. Quality of information that confirms users’ earlier expectations.
c. Imperative for providing comparisons of a company from period
to period.
d. Ignores the economic consequences of a standard or rule.
e. Requires a high degree of consensus among individuals on a
given measurement.
f. Predictive value is an ingredient of this fundamental quality of
information.
g. Four qualitative characteristics that enhance both relevance and
faithful representation.
h. An item is not reported because its effect on income would not
change a decision.
i. Neutrality is a key ingredient of this fundamental quality of
accounting information.
j. Two fundamental qualities that make accounting information
useful for decision-making purposes.

--- Page 177 ---
k. Issuance of interim reports is an example of what enhancing
ingredient?
E2.5 (LO 2) (Elements of Financial Statements) Five
interrelated elements that are most directly related to measuring the
performance and financial status of an enterprise are provided below.
Assets
Income
Liabilities Expenses
Equity
Instructions
Identify the element or elements associated with the following nine
items.
a. Obligation to transfer resources arising from a past transaction.
b. Increases ownership interest by issuance of shares.
c. Declares and pays cash dividends to owners.
d. Increases in net assets in a period from non-owner sources.
e. Items characterized by service potential or future economic
benefit.
f. Equals increase in assets less liabilities during the year, after
adding distributions to owners and subtracting investments by
owners.
g. Residual interest in the assets of the enterprise after deducting its
liabilities.
h. Increases assets during a period through sale of product.
i. Decreases assets during the period by purchasing the company’s
own shares.
E2.6 (LO 3, 4) (Assumptions, Principles, and Constraint)
Presented below are the assumptions, principles, and constraint used
in this chapter.

--- Page 178 ---
1. Economic entity assumption
2. Going concern assumption
3. Monetary unit assumption
4. Periodicity assumption
5. Accrual-basis assumption
6. Historical cost principle
7. Fair value principle
8. Expense recognition principle
9. Full disclosure principle
10. Revenue recognition principle
11. Cost constraint
Instructions
Identify by number the accounting assumption, principle, or
constraint that describes each situation below. Do not use a number
more than once.
a. Allocates expenses to revenues in the proper period.
b. Indicates that fair value changes subsequent to purchase are not
recorded in the accounts. (Do not use revenue recognition
principle.)
c. Ensures that all relevant financial information is reported.
d. Explains why plant assets are not reported at liquidation value.
(Do not use historical cost principle.)
e. Generally records revenue at the point of sale.
f. Indicates that personal and business record keeping should be
separately maintained.
g. Separates financial information into time periods for reporting
purposes.

--- Page 179 ---
h. Permits the use of fair value valuation in certain situations.
i. Assumes that the yen is the “measuring stick” used to report on
financial performance of a Japanese company.
E2.7 (LO 3, 4) (Assumptions, Principles, and Constraint)
Presented below are a number of operational guidelines and practices
that have developed over time.
Instructions
Select the assumption, principle, or constraint that most appropriately
justifies these procedures and practices. (Do not use qualitative
characteristics.)
a. Fair value changes are not recognized in the accounting records.
b. Accounts receivable are recorded for sales on account rather than
waiting until cash is received.
c. Financial information is presented so that investors will not be
misled.
d. Intangible assets are capitalized and amortized over periods
benefited.
e. Brokerage companies use fair value for purposes of valuing
financial securities.
f. Each enterprise is kept as a unit distinct from its owner or
owners.
g. All significant post-statement of financial position events are
reported.
h. Revenue is recorded at point of sale.
i. All important aspects of bond indentures are presented in
financial statements.
j. Rationale for accrual accounting.
k. The use of consolidated statements is justified.
l. Reporting must be done at defined time intervals.

--- Page 180 ---
m. An allowance for doubtful accounts is established.
n. All payments out of petty cash are charged to Miscellaneous
Expense.
o. Goodwill is recorded only at time of purchase.
p. Cash received and paid is not the basis used to recognize revenues
and expenses.
q. A company charges its sales commission costs to expense.
E2.8 (LO 4) (Full Disclosure Principle) The following facts relate
to Weller AG. Assume that no mention of these facts was made in the
financial statements and the related notes.
Instructions
Assume that you are the auditor of Weller AG and that you have been
asked to explain the appropriate accounting and related disclosure
necessary for each of these items.
a. The company decided that, for the sake of conciseness, only net
income should be reported on the income statement. Details as to
revenues, cost of goods sold, and expenses were omitted.
b. Equipment purchases of €170,000 were partly financed during
the year through the issuance of a €110,000 notes payable. The
company offset the equipment against the notes payable and
reported plant assets at €60,000.
c. Weller has reported its ending inventory at €2,100,000 in the
financial statements. No other information related to inventories
is presented in the financial statements and related notes.
d. The company changed its method of valuing inventories from
weighted-average to FIFO. No mention of this change was made
in the financial statements.
E2.9 (LO 4) 
 (Accounting Principles—
Comprehensive) Presented below are a number of business
transactions that occurred during the current year for Gonzales SpA.

--- Page 181 ---
Instructions
In each of the situations, discuss the appropriateness of the journal
entries.
a. The president of Gonzales SpA used his expense account to
purchase a new Suburban solely for personal use. The following
journal entry was made.
Miscellaneous Expense 29,000
Cash
29,000
b. Merchandise inventory that cost €620,000 is reported on the
statement of financial position at €690,000, the expected selling
price less estimated selling costs. The following entry was made
to record this increase in value.
Inventory
70,000
Sales Revenue
70,000
c. The company is being sued for €500,000 by a customer who
claims damages for personal injury apparently caused by a
defective product. Company attorneys feel extremely confident
that the company will have no liability for damages resulting
from the situation. Nevertheless, the company decides to make
the following entry.
Loss from Lawsuit
500,000
Liability for Lawsuit
500,000
d. Because the general level of prices increased during the current
year, Gonzales SpA determined that there was a €16,000
understatement of depreciation expense on its equipment and
decided to record it in its accounts. The following entry was made.
Depreciation Expense
16,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
16,000
e. Gonzales SpA has been concerned about whether intangible
assets could generate cash in case of liquidation. As a
consequence, goodwill arising from a purchase transaction during

--- Page 182 ---
the current year and recorded at €800,000 was written off as
follows.
Retained Earnings 800,000
Goodwill
800,000
f. Because of a “fire sale,” equipment obviously worth €200,000
was acquired at a cost of €155,000. The following entry was
made.
Equipment
200,000
Cash
155,000
Sales Revenue
45,000
E2.10 (LO 4) 
 (Accounting Principles—
Comprehensive) The following information relates to Wang Group.
Instructions
Comment on the appropriateness of the accounting procedures
followed by Wang Group.
a. Depreciation expense on the building for the year was ¥60,000.
Because the building was increasing in value during the year, the
controller decided to charge the depreciation expense to retained
earnings instead of to net income. The following entry is
recorded.
Retained Earnings
60,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings
60,000
b. Materials were purchased on January 1, 2022, for ¥120,000 and
this amount was entered in the Materials account. On December
31, 2022, the materials would have cost ¥141,000, so the
following entry is made.
Inventory
21,000
Gain on Inventories
21,000
c. During the year, the company purchased equipment through the
issuance of ordinary shares. The shares had a par value of ¥

--- Page 183 ---
135,000 and a fair value of ¥450,000. The fair value of the
equipment was not easily determinable. The company recorded
this transaction as follows.
Equipment
135,000
Share Capital
135,000
d. During the year, the company sold certain equipment for ¥
285,000, recognizing a gain of ¥69,000. Because the controller
believed that new equipment would be needed in the near future,
she decided to defer the gain and amortize it over the life of any
new equipment purchased.
e. An order for ¥61,500 has been received from a customer for
products on hand. This order was shipped on January 9, 2022.
The company made the following entry in 2021.
Accounts Receivable 61,500
Sales Revenue
61,500
Concepts for Analysis
CA2.1 (LO 1) (Conceptual Framework—General) Wayne Cooper
has some questions regarding the theoretical framework in which
IFRS is established. He knows that the IASB has attempted to develop
a conceptual framework for accounting theory formulation. Yet,
Wayne’s supervisors have indicated that these theoretical frameworks
have little value in the practical sense (i.e., in the real world). Wayne
did notice that accounting rules seem to be established after the fact
rather than before. He thought this indicated a lack of theory
structure but never really questioned the process during his studies
because he was too busy doing the homework.
Wayne feels that some of his anxiety about accounting theory and
accounting semantics could be alleviated by identifying the basic
concepts and definitions accepted by the profession and considering
them in light of his current work. By doing this, he hopes to develop
an appropriate connection between theory and practice.
Instructions

--- Page 184 ---
a. Help Wayne recognize the purpose of a conceptual framework.
b. Identify the benefits that arise from a conceptual framework.
CA2.2 (LO 1, 2) 
 (Conceptual Framework—General)
The IASB’s Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting sets forth
the objective and fundamentals that will be the basis for developing
financial accounting and reporting standards. The objective identifies
the purpose of financial reporting. The fundamentals are the
underlying concepts of financial accounting that guide the selection of
transactions, events, and circumstances to be accounted for; their
recognition and measurement; and the means of summarizing and
communicating them to interested parties.
The characteristics or qualities of information discussed in the
Conceptual Framework are the concepts that make information useful
and the qualities to be sought when accounting choices are made.
Instructions
a. Identify and discuss the benefits that can be expected to be
derived from the Conceptual Framework.
b. What is the most important quality for accounting information as
identified in the Conceptual Framework? Explain why it is the
most important.
c. Briefly discuss the importance of any three of the fundamental
qualitative characteristics or enhancing qualities of accounting
information.
CA2.3 (LO 1) (Objective of Financial Reporting) Homer
Winslow and Jane Alexander are discussing various aspects of the
Conceptual Framework. Homer indicates that this pronouncement
provides little, if any, guidance to the practicing professional in
resolving accounting controversies. He believes that the Conceptual
Framework provides such broad guidelines that it would be
impossible to apply the objective(s) to present-day reporting
problems. Jane concedes this point but indicates that objective(s) are

--- Page 185 ---
still needed to provide a starting point for the IASB in helping to
improve financial reporting.
Instructions
a. Indicate the basic objective established in the Conceptual
Framework.
b. What do you think is the meaning of Jane’s statement that the
IASB needs a starting point to resolve accounting controversies
about how to improve financial reporting?
CA2.4 (LO 2) 
 (Qualitative Characteristics)
Accounting information provides useful information about business
transactions and events. Those who provide and use financial reports
must often select and evaluate accounting alternatives. The
Conceptual Framework examines the characteristics of accounting
information that make it useful for decision-making. It also points out
that various limitations inherent in the measurement and reporting
process may necessitate trade-offs or sacrifices among the
characteristics of useful information.
Instructions
a. Describe briefly the following characteristics of useful accounting
information.
1. Relevance.
2. Faithful representation.
3. Understandability.
4. Comparability (consistency).
5. Neutrality.
b. For each of the following pairs of information characteristics, give
an example of a situation in which one of the characteristics may
be sacrificed in return for a gain in the other.
1. Relevance and faithful representation.

--- Page 186 ---
2. Relevance and consistency.
3. Comparability and consistency.
4. Relevance and understandability.
c. What criterion should be used to evaluate trade-offs between
information characteristics?
CA2.5 (LO 4) (Revenue Recognition Principle) After the
presentation of your report on the examination of the financial
statements to the board of directors of Piper Publishing, one of the
new directors expresses surprise that the income statement assumes
that an equal proportion of the revenue is earned with the publication
of every issue of the company’s magazine. She feels that the “crucial
event” in the process of recognizing revenue in the magazine business
is the cash sale of the subscription. She says that she does not
understand why most of the revenue cannot be recognized in the
period of the sale.
Instructions
Discuss the propriety of timing the recognition of revenue in Piper
Publishing’s accounts with respect to the following.
a. The cash sale of the magazine subscription.
b. The publication of the magazine every month.
c. Both events, by recognizing a portion of the revenue with the cash
sale of the magazine subscription and a portion of the revenue
with the publication of the magazine every month.
CA2.6 (LO 4) (Expense Recognition Principle) An accountant
must be familiar with the concepts involved in determining earnings
of a business entity. The amount of earnings reported for a business
entity is dependent on the proper recognition, in general, of revenue
and expense for a given time period. In some situations, costs are
recognized as expenses at the time of product sale. In other situations,
guidelines have been developed for recognizing costs as expenses or
losses by other criteria.

--- Page 187 ---
Instructions
a. Explain the rationale for recognizing costs as expenses at the time
of product sale.
b. What is the rationale underlying the appropriateness of treating
costs as expenses of a period instead of assigning the costs to an
asset? Explain.
c. In what general circumstances would it be appropriate to treat a
cost as an asset instead of as an expense? Explain.
d. Some expenses are assigned to specific accounting periods on the
basis of systematic and rational allocation of asset cost. Explain
the underlying rationale for recognizing expenses on the basis of
systematic and rational allocation of asset cost.
e. Identify the conditions under which it would be appropriate to
treat a cost as a loss.
CA2.7 (LO 4) (Expense Recognition Principle) Daniel
Barenboim sells and erects shell houses, that is, frame structures that
are completely finished on the outside but are unfinished on the
inside except for flooring, partition studding, and ceiling joists. Shell
houses are sold chiefly to customers who are handy with tools and
who have time to do the interior wiring, plumbing, wall completion
and finishing, and other work necessary to make the shell houses
livable dwellings.
Barenboim buys shell houses from a manufacturer in unassembled
packages consisting of all lumber, roofing, doors, windows, and
similar materials necessary to complete a shell house. Upon
commencing operations in a new area, Barenboim buys or leases land
as a site for his local warehouse, field office, and display houses.
Sample display houses are erected at a total cost of $30,000 to
$44,000 including the cost of the unassembled packages. The chief
element of cost of the display houses is the unassembled packages,
inasmuch as erection is a short, low-cost operation. Old sample
models are torn down or altered into new models every 3 to 7 years.
Sample display houses have little residual value because dismantling

--- Page 188 ---
and moving costs amount to nearly as much as the cost of an
unassembled package.
Instructions
a. A choice must be made between (1) expensing the costs of sample
display houses in the periods in which the expenditure is made
and (2) spreading the costs over more than one period. Discuss
the advantages of each method.
b. Would it be preferable to amortize the cost of display houses on
the basis of (1) the passage of time or (2) the number of shell
houses sold? Explain.
CA2.8 (LO 2) 
 (Qualitative Characteristics) Recently,
your Uncle Carlos Beltran, who knows that you always have your eye
out for a profitable investment, has discussed the possibility of your
purchasing some company bonds. He suggests that you may wish to
get in on the “ground floor” of this deal. The bonds being issued by
Neville AG are 10-year debentures which promise a 40% rate of
return. Neville manufactures novelty/party items.
You have told Neville that, unless you can take a look at its financial
statements, you would not feel comfortable about such an investment.
Believing that this is the chance of a lifetime, Uncle Carlos has
procured a copy of Neville’s most recent, unaudited financial
statements, which are a year old. These statements were prepared by
Mrs. Andy Neville. You peruse these statements, and they are quite
impressive. The statement of financial position showed a debt to
equity ratio of 0.10 and, for the year shown, the company reported net
income of €2,424,240.
The financial statements are not shown in comparison with amounts
from other years. In addition, no significant note disclosures about
inventory valuation, depreciation methods, loan agreements, etc. are
available.
Instructions

--- Page 189 ---
Write a letter to Uncle Carlos explaining why it would be unwise to
base an investment decision on the financial statements that he has
provided to you. Be sure to explain why these financial statements are
neither relevant nor a faithful representation.
CA2.9 (LO 4) 
 (Expense Recognition Principle) Anderson
Nuclear Power Plant will be “mothballed” at the end of its useful life
(approximately 20 years) at great expense. Accountants Ana Alicia and
Ed Bradley argue whether it is better to allocate the expense of
mothballing over the next 20 years or ignore it until mothballing
occurs.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What stakeholders should be considered?
b. What ethical issue, if any, underlies the dispute?
c. What alternatives should be considered?
d. Assess the consequences of the alternatives.
e. What decision would you recommend?
CA2.10 (LO 4) (Cost Constraint) A Special Committee on
Financial Reporting proposed the following constraints related to
financial reporting.
1. Business reporting should exclude information outside of
management’s expertise or for which management is not the best
source, such as information about competitors.
2. Management should not be required to report information that
would significantly harm the company’s competitive position.
3. Management should not be required to provide forecasted
financial statements. Rather, management should provide
information that helps users forecast for themselves the
company’s financial future.

--- Page 190 ---
4. Other than for financial statements, management need report
only the information it knows. That is, management should be
under no obligation to gather information it does not have or
does not need to manage the business.
5. Companies should present certain elements of business reporting
only if users and management agree they should be reported—a
concept of flexible reporting.
6. Companies should not have to report forward-looking
information unless there are effective deterrents to unwarranted
litigation that discourages companies from doing so.
Instructions
For each item, briefly discuss how the proposed constraint addresses
concerns about the costs and benefits of financial reporting.
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A.
The company’s complete annual report, including the notes to the
financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to
answer the following questions.
a. Using the notes to the consolidated financial statements,
determine M&S’s revenue recognition policies.
b. Give two examples of where historical cost information is
reported in M&S’s financial statements and related notes. Give
two examples of the use of fair value information reported in
either the financial statements or related notes.

--- Page 191 ---
c. How can we determine that the accounting principles used by
M&S are prepared on a basis consistent with those of last year?
d. What is M&S’s accounting policy related to volume-based
rebates? How is uncollected supplier income classified in the
financial statements?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are
presented in Appendices B and C, respectively. The complete annual
reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following
questions.
a. Briefly discuss the currency used by each company in its financial
statements. Does the currency used affect the comparability of
their reports? Briefly explain.
b. What are the primary segments or product groups of these two
companies as shown in their notes to the financial statements?
c. How are inventories for these two companies valued? How does
their accounting for inventories affect comparability between the
two companies?
d. Which company changed its accounting policies, which could
affect the consistency of the financial results from the previous
year? What were these changes?
Financial Statement Analysis Case
Nokia (FIN) provided the following disclosure in a recent annual
report.

--- Page 192 ---
Use of Estimates (Partial)
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with IFRS
requires the application of judgment by management in selecting
appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates,
which inherently contain some degree of uncertainty … are areas
requiring significant judgment and estimation that may have an
impact on reported results and the financial position.
Revenue Recognition
Sales from the majority of the Group are recognized when the
significant risks and rewards of ownership have transferred to the
buyer, continuing managerial involvement usually associated
with ownership and effective control have ceased, the amount of
revenue can be measured reliably, it is probable that economic
benefits associated with the transaction will flow to the Group
and the costs incurred or to be incurred in respect of the
transaction can be measured reliably. Sales may materially
change if management’s assessment of such criteria was
determined to be inaccurate. The Group makes price protection
adjustments based on estimates of future price reductions and
certain agreed customer inventories at the date of the price
adjustment. Possible changes in these estimates could result in
revisions to the sales in future periods.
Revenue from contracts involving solutions achieved through
modification of complex telecommunications equipment is
recognized on the percentage of completion basis when the
outcome of the contract can be estimated reliably. Recognized
revenues and profits are subject to revisions during the project in
the event that the assumptions regarding the overall project
outcome are revised. Current sales and profit estimates for
projects may materially change due to the early stage of a long-
term project, new technology, changes in the project scope,
changes in costs, changes in timing, changes in customers’ plans,
realization of penalties, and other corresponding factors.
Instructions

--- Page 193 ---
a. Briefly discuss how Nokia’s revenue recognition policies are
consistent with the revenue recognition principle. Evaluate both:
1. Sales.
2. Revenue from contracts.
b. Briefly discuss how estimates inherent in Nokia’s revenue
recognition policies can result in reported revenue numbers that
are not relevant and faithful representations.
c. Assume that Nokia’s competitors use similar revenue recognition
policies for their sales. What are some of the judgments inherent
in applying those policies that could raise concerns with respect
to the qualitative characteristic of comparability?
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
William Murray achieved one of his life-long dreams by opening his
own business, The Caddie Shack Driving Range, on May 1, 2022. He
invested $20,000 of his own savings in the business. He paid $6,000
cash to have a small building constructed to house the operations and
spent $800 on golf clubs, golf balls, and yardage signs. Murray leased
4 acres of land at a cost of $1,000 per month. (He paid the first
month’s rent in cash.) During the first month, advertising costs
totaled $750, of which $150 was unpaid at the end of the month.
Murray paid his three nephews $400 for retrieving golf balls. He
deposited in the company’s bank account all revenues from customers
($4,700). On May 15, Murray withdrew $800 in cash for personal use.
On May 31, the company received a utility bill for $100 but did not
immediately pay it. On May 31, the balance in the company bank
account was $15,100.
Murray is feeling pretty good about results for the first month, but his
estimate of profitability ranges from a loss of $4,900 to a profit of
$2,450.
Accounting
Prepare a statement of financial position at May 31, 2022. (Murray
appropriately records any depreciation expense on a quarterly basis.)

--- Page 194 ---
How could Murray have determined that the business operated at a
profit of $2,450? How could Murray conclude that the business
operated at a loss of $4,900?
Analysis
Assume Murray has asked you to become a partner in his business.
Under the partnership agreement, after paying him $10,000, you
would share equally in all future profits. Which of the two income
measures above would be more useful in deciding whether to become
a partner? Explain.
Principles
What is income according to IFRS? What concepts do the differences
in income measures for The Caddie Shack Driving Range illustrate?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 8, Accounting Policies,
Changes in Accounting Estimates, and Errors (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[2] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting (London, U.K.:
IASB, 2018).
[3] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 1, The
Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting” (London, U.K.:
IASB, 2018).
[4] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 2,
Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2018).
[5] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 2,
Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras. 2.16–2.17.
[6] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 2,
Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 2.30.

--- Page 195 ---
[7] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 2,
Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 2.36.
[8] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 4, The
Elements of Financial Statements” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018).
[9] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 3,
Financial Statements and the Reporting Entity” (London, U.K.: IASB,
2018), paras. 3.10–3.14.
[10] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 3,
Financial Statements and the Reporting Entity” (London, U.K.: IASB,
2018), par. 3.9.
[11] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 8,
Concepts of Capital and Capital Maintenance” (London, U.K.: IASB,
2018), par. 8.3.
[12] International Accounting Standard No. 29, Financial Reporting
in Hyperinflationary Economies (London, U.K.: IASB, 2001).
[13] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 3,
Financial Statements and the Reporting Entity” (London, U.K.: IASB,
2018), paras. 3.4–3.7.
[14] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 1, The
Objective of General Purpose Financial Reporting” (London, U.K.:
IASB, 2018), par. 1.17.
[15] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 6,
Measurement” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras. 6.4–6.8.
[16] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 6,
Measurement” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras. 6.10–6.22.
[17] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 6,
Measurement” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 6.12.
[18] International Financial Reporting Standard 9, “Financial
Instruments, Chapter 4: Classification” (London, U.K.: IASB 2014),
paras. 4.1.5 and 4.2.2.

--- Page 196 ---
[19] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 6,
Measurement” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras. 6.43–6.76.
[20] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 5,
Recognition and Derecognition” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 5.1.
[21] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 5,
Recognition and Derecognition” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), par. 5.26.
[22] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 5,
Recognition and Derecognition” (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras.
5.7–5.11.
[23] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 2,
Qualitative Characteristics of Useful Financial Information” (London,
U.K.: IASB, 2018), paras. 2.39–2.43.
Research Case
Your aunt recently received the annual report for a company in which
she has invested. The report notes that the statements have been
prepared in accordance with IFRS. She has also heard that certain
terms have special meanings in accounting relative to everyday use.
She would like you to explain the meaning of terms she has come
across related to accounting.
Instructions
Access the Conceptual Framework at the IFRS website (you may
register for free IFRS access at this site). When you have accessed the
documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet browser to
prepare responses to the following items. (Provide paragraph
citations.)
a. How is “materiality” defined in the Conceptual Framework?
b. Briefly discuss the role of completeness as it relates to faithful
representation.
c. Your aunt observes that under IFRS, the financial statements are
prepared on the accrual basis. According to the Conceptual
Framework, what does the “accrual basis” mean?

--- Page 197 ---
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Compare the conceptual frameworks underlying IFRS and U.S.
GAAP.
The IASB and the FASB originally planned to develop a common
conceptual framework. The Boards converged on two subjects:
Objectives of Financial Reporting and Qualitative Characteristics of
Accounting Information. However, the IASB decided it was important
to move forward and complete other parts of the conceptual
framework. The IASB issued its updated conceptual framework in
2018. The FASB did not join this effort although it now appears likely
it will start soon on adding to and modifying its existing conceptual
framework as well. Both Boards have that same objective, that is, to
develop a conceptual framework consisting of standards that are
principles-based and internally consistent, thereby leading to the most
useful financial reporting. Hopefully, the two Boards will eventually
agree on the key components of a common conceptual framework.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP
and IFRS related to the Conceptual Framework for Financial
Reporting.
Similarities
In 2010, the IASB and FASB completed the first phase of a jointly
created conceptual framework. In this first phase, they agreed on
the objective of financial reporting and a common set of desired
qualitative characteristics. These were presented in the Chapter 2
discussion. Note that prior to this converged phase, the
Conceptual Framework gave more emphasis to the objective of
providing information on management’s performance
(stewardship).

--- Page 198 ---
The existing conceptual frameworks underlying U.S. GAAP and
IFRS are very similar. That is, they are organized in a similar
manner (objective, elements, qualitative characteristics, etc.).
There is no real need to change many aspects of the existing
frameworks other than to converge different ways of discussing
essentially the same concepts.
Both the IASB and FASB have similar measurement principles,
based on historical cost and fair value. In 2011, the Boards issued
a converged standard on fair value measurement so that the
definition of fair value, measurement techniques, and disclosures
are the same between U.S. GAAP and IFRS when fair value is
used in financial statements.
Differences
Under the 2018 update to the IASB Conceptual Framework, there
are now some subtle differences between the frameworks related
to definitions of assets and liabilities (see the following “About
the Numbers” discussion), measurement, and presentation.
The updated IASB Conceptual Framework makes explicit a role
for management stewardship in the objective of financial
reporting, and prudence (a form of conservatism) is a dimension
of the qualitative characteristic of faithful representation
(neutrality).
Although both U.S. GAAP and IFRS are increasing the use of fair
value to report assets, at this point IFRS has adopted it more
broadly. As examples, under IFRS, companies can apply fair value
to property, plant, and equipment; natural resources; and, in
some cases, intangible assets.
U.S. GAAP has a concept statement to guide estimation of fair
values when market-related data are not available (Statement of
Financial Accounting Concepts No. 7, “Using Cash Flow
Information and Present Value in Accounting”). The IASB has not
issued a similar concept statement; it has issued a fair value
standard (IFRS 13) that is converged with U.S. GAAP.

--- Page 199 ---
The monetary unit assumption is part of each framework.
However, the unit of measure will vary depending on the
currency used in the country in which the company is based (e.g.,
Chinese yuan, Japanese yen, and British pound).
The economic entity assumption is also part of each framework,
although some cultural differences result in differences in its
application. For example, in Japan many companies have formed
such strong alliances that they behave more like related divisions
in the same company, although they are separate corporations.
About the Numbers
While the conceptual framework that underlies U.S. GAAP is very
similar to that used to develop IFRS, the elements identified and their
definitions under U.S. GAAP are different. The FASB elements and
their definitions are as follows.

--- Page 200 ---
Elements of Financial Statements
Asset. Probable future economic benefits obtained or controlled
by a particular entity as a result of past transactions or events.
Liabilities. Probable future sacrifices of economic benefits
arising from present obligations of a particular entity to transfer
assets or provide services to other entities in the future as a result
of past transactions or events.
Equity. Residual interest in the assets of an entity that remains
after deducting its liabilities. In a business enterprise, the equity is
the ownership interest.
Investments by Owners. Increases in net assets of a particular
enterprise resulting from transfers to it from other entities of
something of value to obtain or increase ownership interests (or
equity) in it. Assets are most commonly received as investments
by owners, but that which is received may also include services or
satisfaction or conversion of liabilities of the enterprise.
Distributions to Owners. Decreases in net assets of a particular
enterprise resulting from transferring assets, rendering services, or
incurring liabilities by the enterprise to owners. Distributions to
owners decrease ownership interests (or equity) in an enterprise.
Comprehensive Income. Change in equity (net assets) of an
entity during a period from transactions and other events and
circumstances from non-owner sources. It includes all changes in
equity during a period except those resulting from investments by
owners and distributions to owners.
Revenues. Inflows or other enhancements of assets of an entity
or settlement of its liabilities (or a combination of both) during a
period from delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or
other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or
central operations.
Expenses. Outflows or other using up of assets or incurrences of
liabilities (or a combination of both) during a period from

--- Page 201 ---
delivering or producing goods, rendering services, or carrying out
other activities that constitute the entity’s ongoing major or
central operations.
Gains. Increases in equity (net assets) from peripheral or
incidental transactions of an entity and from all other transactions
and other events and circumstances affecting the entity during a
period except those that result from revenues or investments by
owners.
Losses. Decreases in equity (net assets) from peripheral or
incidental transactions of an entity and from all other transactions
and other events and circumstances affecting the entity during a
period except those that result from expenses or distributions to
owners.
Source: “Elements of Financial Statements,” Statement of Financial Accounting
Concepts No. 6 (Stamford, Conn.: FASB, December 1985), pp. ix and x.
On the Horizon
The Boards have made much progress in updating and converging
their conceptual frameworks. The IASB issuance of its updated
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting in 2018 represents an
important milestone. The FASB continues to work on its framework to
address remaining elements not converged (definitions of assets and
liabilities, measurement, and presentation). Progress to date indicates
that the FASB’s work has been informed by the IASB’s updated
framework (go to the FASB website; click on Projects and then
Technical Agenda). We are optimistic that these efforts will result in
substantially converged conceptual frameworks, which will support
the development of standards that help financial statement users to
make better decisions.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following statements about the IASB and FASB
conceptual frameworks is not correct?

--- Page 202 ---
a. The IASB conceptual framework does not identify the element
comprehensive income.
b. The existing IASB and FASB conceptual frameworks are
organized in similar ways.
c. The FASB and IASB agree that the objective of financial reporting
is to provide useful information to investors and creditors.
d. IFRS does not allow use of fair value as a measurement basis.
2. Which of the following statements is false?
a. The monetary unit assumption is used under U.S. GAAP.
b. Under IFRS, companies may use fair value for property, plant,
and equipment.
c. The FASB and IASB are no longer working on a joint conceptual
framework project.
d. Under IFRS, there are the same number of financial statement
elements as in U.S. GAAP.
3. Companies that use U.S. GAAP:
a. must report all their assets on the balance sheet (statement of
financial position) at fair value.
b. may report property, plant, and equipment and natural resources
at fair value.
c. are guided by a concept statement on estimating fair values when
market data are not available.
d. may only use historical cost as the measurement basis in
financial reporting.
4. The issues that the FASB must still address in developing its
updated conceptual framework include all of the following except:
a. whether the characteristic of relevance should be traded off in
favor of information that is verifiable.

--- Page 203 ---
b. the qualitative characteristics of useful information.
c. the objective of financial reporting.
d. the asset and liability definitions.
5. With respect to the FASB/IASB conceptual framework projects:
a. work is being conducted together on each part of the project.
b. work is being conducted with other national standard-setters.
c. there was never a plan to develop a common conceptual
framework.
d. the IASB has worked at a faster pace than the FASB.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP2.1 Do the IASB and U.S. GAAP conceptual frameworks differ
in terms of fair value measurement? Explain.
GAAP2.2 How do the FASB and IASB conceptual frameworks differ
in terms of the elements of financial statements?
GAAP2.3 What is the status of the Boards’ efforts to develop a
converged conceptual framework?
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. d 2. d 3. c 4. d 5. d
Notes
1 Recall from our discussion in Chapter 1 that while the IASB’s
Conceptual Framework and any changes to it pass through the
same due process (discussion paper, preliminary views, public
hearing, exposure draft, etc.) as do the IFRSs, the Conceptual
Framework is not an IFRS. That is, the Conceptual Framework
does not define standards for any particular measurement or
disclosure issue, and nothing in the Conceptual Framework
overrides any specific IFRS. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature
References section near the end of the chapter.)

--- Page 204 ---
2 C. Horngren, “Uses and Limitations of a Conceptual Framework,”
Journal of Accountancy (April 1981), p. 90.
3 The IASB and the FASB had worked together to develop converged
concepts statements on the objective of financial reporting and
qualitative characteristics of accounting information, resulting in
updated chapters on those elements in 2010. Since 2010, the
Boards worked on their own schedules to address the remaining
elements of the conceptual framework project. As discussed at the
beginning of the chapter, the IASB issued its updated Conceptual
Framework for Financial Reporting in 2018. The FASB continues
to work on its framework to address concepts related to definitions
of assets and liabilities, measurement, and presentation. For more
information, go to the FASB website; click on Projects and then
Technical Agenda.
4 Surveys indicate that users highly value consistency. They note that
a change tends to destroy the comparability of data before and after
the change. Some companies assist users to understand the pre-
and post-change data. Generally, however, users say they lose the
ability to analyze over time. IFRS guidelines (discussed in Chapter
22) on accounting changes are designed to improve the
comparability of the data before and after the change.
5 The concept of the entity is changing. For example, defining the
“outer edges” of companies is now harder. Public companies often
consist of multiple public subsidiaries, each with joint ventures,
licensing arrangements, and other affiliations. Increasingly,
companies form and dissolve joint ventures or customer-supplier
relationships in a matter of months or weeks. These “virtual
companies” raise accounting issues about how to account for the
entity. See Steven H. Wallman, “The Future of Accounting and
Disclosure in an Evolving World: The Need for Dramatic Change,”
Accounting Horizons (September 1995).
6 This approach reflects adoption of a financial capital approach to
capital maintenance under which the change in capital or a
company’s net assets is measured in nominal monetary units

--- Page 205 ---
without adjusting for changes in prices. [11] There is a separate
IFRS (IFRS No. 29, “Financial Reporting in Hyperinflationary
Economies”) that provides guidance on how to account for
adjustments to the purchasing power of the monetary unit. [12]
7 For major groups of assets and liabilities, companies must disclose
(1) the fair value measurement and (2) the fair value hierarchy
level of the measurements as a whole, classified by Level 1, 2, or 3.
Given the judgment involved, it follows that the more a company
depends on Level 3 to determine fair values, the more information
about the valuation process the company will need to disclose.
Thus, additional disclosures are required for Level 3
measurements; we discuss these disclosures in more detail in
subsequent chapters.
8 Detailed discussion on measurement bases was not included in the
pre-2018 Conceptual Framework. However, these current value
measurement bases are reflected in certain IFRS. By including
them in the Conceptual Framework, the IASB, when establishing
new standards, can be guided by this Framework to ensure
consistency. Indeed, while current cost is not often used in IFRS,
value in use and fulfillment costs will be discussed in subsequent
chapters in this text.
9 The IFRS Conceptual Framework provides significant guidance on
selecting a measurement basis that provides the most useful
information. The optimal choice depends on the facts and
circumstances of the company. [19]
10 Derecognition is the removal of all or part of a recognized asset or
liability from a company’s statement of financial position.
Derecognition normally occurs when that item no longer meets the
definition of an asset or of a liability. For assets, derecognition
generally occurs when the company loses control of all or part of
the recognized asset. For liabilities, derecognition generally occurs
when the company no longer has a present obligation related to the
liability. [21] We address derecognition as it relates to topics
discussed throughout the text.

--- Page 206 ---
11 The framework shown in Illustration 2.5 is based on the recent
standard on revenue recognition. The new guidance establishes the
principles to report useful information about the nature, timing,
and uncertainty of revenue from contracts with customers.
12 This approach is commonly referred to as the matching
principle. However, there is some debate about the conceptual
validity of the matching principle. A major concern is that matching
permits companies to defer certain costs and treat them as assets
on the statement of financial position. In fact, these costs may not
have future benefits. If abused, this principle permits the statement
of financial position to become a “dumping ground” for unmatched
costs.
13 To provide guidance for management disclosures, the IASB issued
an IFRS practice statement entitled “Management Commentary—A
Framework for Presentation.” The IASB notes that this practice
statement is neither an IFRS nor part of the Conceptual
Framework. However, the guidance is issued on the basis that
management commentary meets the definition of other financial
reporting as referenced in the Conceptual Framework.
14 “Decision-Usefulness: The Overriding Objective,” FASB Viewpoints
(October 19, 1983), p. 4.
15 Charles Rivers and Associates, “Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404: Costs
and Remediation of Deficiencies,” letter from Deloitte and Touche,
Ernst and Young, KPMG, and PricewaterhouseCoopers to the SEC
(April 11, 2005).
Sources: Adapted from Todd Johnson and Kim Petrone, The FASB Cases on Recognition
and Measurement, Second Edition (New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1996); and
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting (London, U.K.: IASB, 2018).

--- Page 207 ---
