CHAPTER 15
Equity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
2. Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
3. Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
4. Indicate how to present and analyze equity.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are integral to the
topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 15
As the following opening story indicates, the growth of global equity capital markets indicates that
investors around the world need useful information. In this chapter, we explain the accounting
issues related to the equity of a corporation. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.
It’s a Global Market
As mentioned in prior chapters, we are moving toward one set of global financial reporting standards
and one “common language” for financial information. This change will probably lead to greater
consolidation of our capital markets. To understand how quickly the global financial world is changing,
let’s examine a few trends occurring on securities exchanges around the world.
In 2007, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) merged with Paris-based Euronext, creating the world’s
first transatlantic securities exchange. NYSE Euronext is the world’s largest exchange group, with
more than 8,000 listed issuers representing over one-third of global equity trading. Similarly,
NASDAQ, the world’s largest electronic securities market, merged with OMX, the Nordic securities
market operator. This electronic exchange operates in 29 countries, on six continents, and has over
3,000 listed issuers, with a market value of approximately $8.5 trillion. Further exchange consolidation
occurred in 2013, when Intercontinental Exchange merged with NYSE.
Another reason for the movement toward international financial reporting standards can be found in
recent initial public offerings (IPOs). For example, total global IPO listings, as well as regional
percentages, were as follows.

--- Page 1185 ---
As indicated, global stock listings have been on the rise, and listings in Asia-Pacific continue to be the
biggest share of IPOs.
Proceeds in Asia were bolstered by the debut of China’s STAR Market in 2019.
Europe-Middle East was the second highest grossing sector, steadily increasing from 2016 to 2018,
recovering from the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the European Union.
Another indicator of globalization is provided by a review of the world’s largest companies, in terms of
revenues and profits as shown in the following table.
Top 10 of the Fortune Global 500
Rank
Company
Revenues (in USD millions) Profits (in USD millions)
1
Walmart (USA)
$514,405
$ 6,670
2
Sinopec Group (CHN)
414,649
5,845
3
Royal Dutch Shell (NDL/GBR)
396,556
23,352
4
China National Petroleum (CHN)
392,976
2,271
5
State Grid (CHN)
387,056
8,175
6
Saudi Aramco (SAU)
355,905
110,975
7
BP (GBR)
303,738
9,383
8
ExxonMobil (USA)
290,212
20,840
9
Volkswagen (DEU)
278,342
14,323
10 Toyota (JPN)
272,162
16,982
Sources: Adapted from L. Ventura, “World’s Largest Companies 2019,” Global Finance (August 29, 2019).
The richest companies in the world by revenue are Walmart (USA), petroleum and chemical
corporation Sinopec (CHN), and Royal Dutch Shell (NDL/GBR). If these companies generate more
sales, why do stock investors prefer to pour money into tech companies and startups? Because—unlike
established companies—tech upstarts have a much greater potential for growth. That said, with seven
different countries represented in the top 10 of the Fortune Global 500, it really is a global market, and
investors should take care not to avoid these global investment opportunities.

--- Page 1186 ---
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted summary review
and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well
as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Corporate Capital
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
Of the three primary forms of business organization—the proprietorship, the partnership, and
the corporation—the corporate form dominates. The corporation is by far the leader in terms of the
aggregate amount of resources controlled, goods and services produced, and people employed.
Although the corporate form has a number of advantages (as well as disadvantages) over the other two
forms, its principal benefit is its facility for attracting and accumulating large amounts of capital.
Corporate Form
The special characteristics of the corporate form that affect accounting include:
1. Influence of corporate law.
2. Use of the share system.
3. Development of a variety of ownership interests.
Corporate Law
Anyone who wishes to establish a corporation must generally submit articles of incorporation to
the appropriate governmental agency for the country in which incorporation is desired. After fulfilling
requirements, the governmental agency issues a corporation charter, thereby recognizing the company
as a legal entity. Regardless of the number of countries in which a corporation has operating divisions,
it is incorporated in only one country. It is to the company’s advantage to incorporate where laws favor
the corporate form of business organization.
Many governments have their own business incorporation acts. The accounting for equity follows the
provisions of these acts. In many cases, the laws are complex and vary both in their provisions and in
their definitions of certain terms. Some laws fail to define technical terms. As a result, terms often
have one meaning in one country and another meaning in a different country. These problems may be
further compounded because legal authorities often interpret the effects and restrictions of the laws
differently.
Share System
Equity in a corporation generally consists of a large number of units or shares. Within a given class of
shares, each share exactly equals every other share. The number of shares possessed determines each
owner’s interest. If a company has ordinary shares divided into 1,000 shares, a person who owns 500
shares controls one-half of the ownership interest. One holding 10 shares has a one-hundredth
interest.
Each share has certain rights and privileges. Only by special contract can a company restrict these
rights and privileges at the time it issues the shares. Owners must examine the articles of
incorporation, the share certificates, and the provisions of applicable laws to ascertain such restrictions
on or variations from the standard rights and privileges. In the absence of restrictive provisions, each
share carries the following rights:

--- Page 1187 ---
1. To share proportionately in profits and losses.
2. To share proportionately in management (the right to vote for directors).
3. To share proportionately in corporate assets upon liquidation.
4. To share proportionately in any new issues of shares of the same class—called the preemptive
right.1
The first three rights are self-explanatory. The last right is used to protect each shareholder’s
proportional interest in the company. The preemptive right protects an existing shareholder
from involuntary dilution of ownership interest. Without this right, shareholders might find
their interest reduced by the issuance of additional shares without their knowledge and at prices
unfavorable to them. However, many corporations have eliminated the preemptive right. Why?
Because this right makes it inconvenient for corporations to issue large amounts of additional shares,
as they frequently do in acquiring other companies.
The share system easily allows one individual to transfer an interest in a company to another investor.
For example, individuals owning shares in Páo de Acucar (BRA) may sell them to others at any
time and at any price without obtaining the consent of the company or other
shareholders. Each share is personal property of the owner, who may dispose of it at will. Páo de
Acucar simply maintains a list or subsidiary ledger of shareholders as a guide to dividend payments,
issuance of share rights, voting proxies, and the like. Because owners freely and frequently transfer
shares, Páo de Acucar must revise the subsidiary ledger of shareholders periodically, generally in
advance of every dividend payment or shareholders’ meeting.
In addition, the major securities exchanges require ownership controls that the typical corporation
finds uneconomic to provide. Thus, corporations often use registrars and transfer agents who
specialize in performing services for recording and transferring shares.
Variety of Ownership Interests
In every corporation, one class of shares must represent the basic ownership interest. That class of
shares is called ordinary. Ordinary shares represent the residual corporate interest that bears the
ultimate risks of loss and receives the benefits of success. They are guaranteed neither dividends nor
assets upon dissolution. But ordinary shareholders generally control the management of the
corporation and tend to profit most if the company is successful. In the event that a corporation has
only one authorized issue of shares, that issue is by definition ordinary shares, whether so designated
in the charter or not.
In an effort to broaden investor appeal, corporations may offer two or more classes of shares, each with
different rights or privileges. In the preceding section, we pointed out that each share of a given issue
has the same four inherent rights as other shares of the same issue. By special contracts between the
corporation and its shareholders, however, the shareholder may sacrifice certain of these rights in
return for other special rights or privileges. Thus special classes of shares, usually called preference
shares, are created. In return for any special preference, the preference shareholder always sacrifices
some of the inherent rights of ordinary shareholders.
A common type of preference is to give preference shareholders a prior claim on earnings. The
corporation thus assures them a dividend, usually at a stated rate, before it distributes any amount to
the ordinary shareholders. In return for this preference, the preference shareholders may sacrifice
their right to a voice in management and/or their right to share in profits beyond the stated rate.

--- Page 1188 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
A Class (B) Act
Some companies grant preferences to different shareholders by issuing different classes of
ordinary shares. For a family-controlled company, issuing newer classes of lower or non-voting
shares (referred to as B shares) effectively creates currency for acquisitions, increases liquidity, or
puts a public value on the company without diluting the family’s powers. For example, the B
shareholders at Vodafone (GBR) only get a vote if the company is to be dissolved. The following
are some notable companies with two-tiered shares.
Company
Votes Controlled by Class B Shareholders
Vodafone (GBR)
0%
Alphabet (USA)
63%
Under Armour (USA)
65.3%
Air Canada (CAN)
(Only Canadian citizens can vote)
Facebook (USA)
43%
Bombardier (CAN)
0%
Some trading exchanges impose rules to protect non-controlling investors. For example, the
Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE) requires family owners to hold no more than 50 percent
of voting shares. For many retail investors, voting rights are not that important. But, investors
must carefully compare the apparent bargain prices for some classes of shares—they may end up
as second-class citizens with no voting rights.
Sources: Data from R. Sullivan, “Dual Share Structure Goes Under Spotlight,” Financial Times (November 1, 2011); M.
Gottfried, “A Double-Digit Return Is Hiding in Plain Sight at Under Armour: The Yawning Gap Between Under Armour’s Voting
and Nonvoting Shares Offers an Opportunity,” Wall Street Journal (November 28, 2016); and D. Shultz, “What Are Non-Voting
Shares?” danashultz.com/2019/03/15/non-voting-shares (March 15, 2019).
Components of Equity
Equity is the residual interest in the assets of the company after deducting all liabilities. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) Equity is often referred to as
shareholders’ equity, stockholders’ equity, or corporate capital. Equity is often subclassified on the
statement of financial position into the following categories (as discussed in Chapter 5).
1. Share capital.
2. Share premium.
3. Retained earnings.
4. Accumulated other comprehensive income.
5. Treasury shares.
6. Non-controlling interest.
Such classifications help financial statement users to better understand the legal or other restrictions
related to the ability of the company to pay dividends or otherwise use its equity for certain defined
purposes.
Companies often make a distinction between contributed capital (paid-in capital) and earned capital.
Contributed (paid-in) capital is the total amount paid in on capital shares—the amount provided
by shareholders to the corporation for use in the business. Contributed capital includes items such as
the par value of all outstanding shares and premiums less discounts on issuance. Earned capital is

--- Page 1189 ---
the capital that develops from profitable operations. It consists of all undistributed income that
remains invested in the company. Retained earnings represents the earned capital of the company.
As indicated above, equity is a residual interest and therefore its value is derived from the amount of
the corporations’ assets and liabilities (see Underlying Concepts). Only in unusual cases will a
company’s equity equal the total fair value of its shares. For example, BMW (DEU) recently had total
equity of €58,088 million and a market capitalization of €53,560 million. BMW’s equity represents the
net contributions from shareholders (from both controlling and non-controlling shareholders) plus
retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive income. As a residual interest, its equity has
no existence apart from the assets and liabilities of BMW—equity equals net assets. Equity is not a
claim to specific assets but a claim against a portion of the total assets. Its amount is not specified or
fixed; it depends on BMW’s profitability. Equity grows if the company is profitable. It shrinks, or may
disappear entirely, if BMW loses money.
Underlying Concepts
According to the Conceptual Framework, equity is defined as a residual, based on the net of assets
minus liabilities.
Issuance of Shares
In issuing shares, companies follow these procedures. First, the applicable governmental agency must
authorize the shares, generally in a certificate of incorporation or charter. Next, the corporation offers
shares for sale, entering into contracts to sell these shares. Then, after receiving amounts for the
shares, the corporation issues the shares. The corporation generally makes no entry in the general
ledger accounts when it receives its share authorization from the jurisdiction of incorporation.
We discuss the accounting problems involved in the issuance of shares under the following topics.
1. Accounting for par value shares.
2. Accounting for no-par shares.
3. Accounting for shares issued in combination with other securities (lump-sum sales).
4. Accounting for shares issued in non-cash transactions.
5. Accounting for costs of issuing shares.
Par Value Shares
The par value of a share has no relationship to its fair value. At present, the par value associated with
most ordinary share issuances is very low. For example, par value for China Railway Construction
Corporation (CHN) is ¥1.00, and for Nestlé S.A. (CHE), it is CHF1. Low par values help companies
avoid the contingent liability associated with shares sold below par.2
To show the required information for issuance of par value shares, corporations maintain accounts for
each class of shares as follows.
1. Preference Shares or Ordinary Shares. Together, these two share accounts reflect the par
value of the corporation’s issued shares. The company credits these accounts when it originally
issues the shares. It makes no additional entries in these accounts unless it issues additional
shares or retires them.
2. Share Premium. The Share Premium account indicates any excess over par value paid in by
shareholders in return for the shares issued to them. Once paid in, the excess over par becomes a
part of the corporation’s share premium. The individual shareholder has no greater claim on the
excess paid in than all other holders of the same class of shares.

--- Page 1190 ---
No-Par Shares
Many countries permit the issuance of shares without par value, called no-par shares. The reasons
for issuance of no-par shares are twofold. First, issuance of no-par shares avoids the contingent
liability (see footnote 2) that might occur if the corporation issued par value shares at a discount.
Second, some confusion exists over the relationship (or rather the absence of a relationship) between
the par value and fair value. If shares have no par value, the questionable treatment of using par
value as a basis for fair value never arises. This is particularly advantageous whenever issuing
shares for items such as tangible or intangible fixed assets.
A major disadvantage of no-par shares is that some countries levy a high tax on these issues. In
addition, in some countries the total issue price for no-par shares may be considered legal capital,
which could reduce the flexibility in paying dividends.
Corporations sell no-par shares, like par value shares, for whatever price they will bring. However,
unlike par value shares, corporations issue them without a premium or a discount. The exact amount
received represents the credit to ordinary or preference shares. For example, Video Electronics AG is
organized with 10,000 ordinary shares authorized without par value. Video Electronics makes only a
memorandum entry for the authorization, inasmuch as no amount is involved. If Video Electronics
then issues 500 shares for cash at €10 per share, it makes the following entry:
Cash
5,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
5,000
If it issues another 500 shares for €11 per share, Video Electronics makes this entry:
Cash
5,500
Share Capital—Ordinary
5,500
True no-par shares should be carried in the accounts at issue price without any share
premium reported. But some countries require that no-par shares have a stated value. The stated
value is a minimum value below which a company cannot issue the shares; instead of being no-par
shares, such stated-value shares become, in effect, shares with a very low par value. Therefore, such
shares are open to all the criticism and abuses that first encouraged the development of no-par shares.
If no-par shares have a stated value of €5 per share but sell for €11, all amounts in excess of €5 are
recorded as share premium, which in many jurisdictions is fully or partially available for dividends.
Thus, no-par shares with a low stated value permit a new corporation to commence its operations with
share premium that may exceed its stated capital. For example, if a company issues 1,000 of the shares
with a €5 stated value at €15 per share for cash, it makes the following entry.
Cash
15,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
5,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
10,000
Most corporations account for no-par shares with a stated value as if they were par value shares with
par equal to the stated value.
Shares Issued with Other Securities (Lump-Sum Sales)
Generally, corporations sell classes of shares separately from one another. The reason to do so is to
track the proceeds relative to each class as well as relative to each lot. Occasionally, a corporation
issues two or more classes of securities for a single payment or lump sum, in the acquisition of another
company. The accounting problem in such lump-sum sales is how to allocate the proceeds among the
several classes of securities. Companies use one of two methods of allocation: (1) the proportional
method and (2) the incremental method.

--- Page 1191 ---
Proportional Method
If the fair value or other sound basis for determining relative value is available for each class of
security, the company allocates the lump sum received among the classes of securities on a
proportional basis. Illustration 15.1 presents an example of the proportional method.
Proportional Method for Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance
Facts: Miller Company issues 1,000 shares of $10 stated value ordinary shares having a fair value of
$20 per share, and 1,000 shares of $10 par value preference shares having a fair value of $12 per
share, for a lump sum of $30,000.
Question: How should Miller Company allocate the proceeds between ordinary and
preference shares under the proportional method?
Solution: Miller allocates the $30,000 to the two classes of shares as follows.
Fair value of ordinary (1,000 × $20) = $20,000
Fair value of preference (1,000 × $12) = 
12,000
Aggregate fair value 
$32,000
Allocated to ordinary: 
× $30,000 = $18,750
Allocated to preference: 
× $30,000 = $11,250
Total allocation 
$30,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.1 Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance—Proportional
Method
Incremental Method
In instances where a company cannot determine the fair value of all classes of securities, it may use
the incremental method. It uses the fair value of the securities as a basis for those classes that it
knows, and allocates the remainder of the lump sum to the class for which it does not know the fair
value. Illustration 15.2 presents an example of the incremental method.
$20,000
$32,000
$12,000
$32,000

--- Page 1192 ---
Incremental Method for Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance
Facts: Hogan Company issues 1,000 shares of $10 stated value ordinary shares having a fair value of
$20 per share, and 1,000 shares of $10 par value preference shares having no established fair value,
for a lump sum of $30,000.
Question: How should Hogan Company allocate the proceeds between ordinary and
preference shares under the incremental method?
Solution: Hogan allocates the $30,000 to the two classes of shares as follows.
Lump-sum receipt
$30,000
Allocated to ordinary (1,000 × $20) (20,000)
Balance allocated to preference
$10,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.2 Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance—Incremental
Method
If a company cannot determine the fair value for any of the classes of shares involved in a
lump-sum exchange, it may need to use other approaches. In this situation, the company may
rely on an expert’s appraisal. Or, if the company knows that one or more of the classes of securities
issued will have a determinable fair value in the near future, it may use a best-estimate basis with the
intent to adjust later upon establishment of the future fair value.
Shares Issued in Non-Cash Transactions
Accounting for the issuance of shares for property or services involves an issue of valuation. The
general rule is that companies should record shares issued for services or property other
than cash at the fair value of the goods or services received, unless that fair value cannot
be measured reliably. If the fair value of the goods or services cannot be measured
reliably, use the fair value of the shares issued. [2]
If a company can readily determine both and the transaction results from an arm’s-length exchange,
there will probably be little difference in their fair values. In such cases, the basis for valuing the
exchange should not matter.
If a company cannot readily determine either the fair value of the shares it issues or the property or
services it receives, it should employ an appropriate valuation technique. Depending on available data,
the valuation may be based on market transactions involving comparable assets or the use of
discounted expected future cash flows. Companies should avoid the use of book, par, or stated values
as a basis of valuation for these transactions.
A company may exchange unissued shares or treasury shares (issued shares that it has reacquired but
not retired) for property or services. If it uses treasury shares and the fair value of the property or
services cannot be reliably estimated, the cost of the treasury shares should not be considered the
decisive factor in establishing the fair value of the property or services. Instead, it should use the fair
value of the treasury shares to value the property or services.
The series of transactions shown in Illustration 15.3 indicate the procedure for recording the
issuance of 10,000 shares of €10 par value ordinary shares for a patent for Marlowe SA, in various
circumstances.
Generally, the board of directors has the power to set the value of non-cash transactions. However,
boards sometimes abuse this power. The issuance of shares for property or services has resulted in
cases of overstated corporate capital through intentional overvaluation of the property or services

--- Page 1193 ---
received. The overvaluation of equity resulting from inflated asset values creates watered shares. The
corporation should eliminate the “water” by simply writing down the overvalued assets.
If, as a result of the issuance of shares for property or services, a corporation undervalues the recorded
assets, it creates secret reserves. An understated corporate structure (secret reserve) may also result
from other methods: excessive depreciation or amortization charges, expensing capital expenditures,
excessive write-downs of inventories or receivables, or any other understatement of assets or
overstatement of liabilities. An example of a liability overstatement is an excessive provision for
estimated product warranties that ultimately results in an understatement of equity, thereby creating a
secret reserve.
ILLUSTRATION 15.3 Issuance of Shares for Patent
Costs of Issuing Shares
When a company like Wesfarmers (AUS) issues shares, it should report direct costs incurred to sell
shares, such as underwriting costs, accounting and legal fees, printing costs, and taxes, as a reduction
of the amounts paid in. Wesfarmers therefore debits issue costs to Share Premium because they are
unrelated to corporate operations. In effect, issue costs are a cost of financing. As such, issue costs
should reduce the proceeds received from the sale of the shares.
Wesfarmers should expense management salaries and other indirect costs related to the share issue
because it is difficult to establish a relationship between these costs and the sale proceeds. In addition,
Wesfarmers expenses recurring costs, primarily registrar and transfer agents’ fees, as incurred.
Preference Shares
As noted earlier, preference shares are a special class of shares that possess certain preferences or
features not possessed by ordinary shares. The following features are those most often associated with
preference share issues.
1. Preference as to dividends.
2. Preference as to assets in the event of liquidation.

--- Page 1194 ---
3. Convertible into ordinary shares.
4. Callable at the option of the corporation.
5. Non-voting.
The features that distinguish preference shares from ordinary shares may be of a more restrictive and
negative nature. For example, the preference shares may be non-voting, non-cumulative, and non-
participating.
Companies usually issue preference shares with a par value, expressing the dividend preference as a
percentage of the par value. Thus, holders of 8 percent preference shares with a $100 par value are
entitled to an annual dividend of $8 per share ($100 × .08). This share is commonly referred to as an 8
percent preference share. In the case of no-par preference shares, a corporation expresses a dividend
preference as a specific dollar amount per share, for example, $7 per share. This share is commonly
referred to as a $7 preference share.
A preference as to dividends does not assure the payment of dividends. It merely assures that the
corporation must pay the stated dividend rate or amount applicable to the preference shares before
paying any dividends on the ordinary shares.
A company often issues preference shares (instead of debt) because of a high debt to equity ratio. In
other instances, it issues preference shares through private placements with other corporations at a
lower-than-market dividend rate because the acquiring corporation often receives largely tax-free
dividends in certain countries.
Features of Preference Shares
A company may attach whatever preferences or restrictions, in whatever combination it desires, to a
preference share issue, as long as it does not specifically violate its country’s incorporation law. Also, it
may issue more than one class of preference shares. We discuss the most common features attributed
to preference shares below.
Cumulative Preference Shares
Cumulative preference shares require that if a company fails to pay a dividend in any year, it must
make it up in a later year before paying any dividends to ordinary shareholders. If the directors fail to
declare a dividend at the normal date for dividend action, the dividend is said to have been “passed.”
Any passed dividend on cumulative preference shares constitutes a dividend in arrears. Because no
liability exists until the board of directors declares a dividend, a corporation does not record a dividend
in arrears as a liability but discloses it in a note to the financial statements. A corporation seldom
issues non-cumulative preference shares because a passed dividend is lost forever to the preference
shareholder. As a result, this type of share issue would be less marketable.
Participating Preference Shares
Holders of participating preference shares share ratably with the ordinary shareholders in any
profit distributions beyond the prescribed rate. That is, 5 percent preference shares, if fully
participating, will receive not only a 5 percent return, but also dividends at the same rates as those paid
to ordinary shareholders if paying amounts in excess of 5 percent of par or stated value to ordinary
shareholders. Note that some participating preference shares are only partially participating.
Convertible Preference Shares
Convertible preference shares give the preference shareholders the option to exchange preference
shares for ordinary shares at a predetermined ratio. The convertible preference shareholder not only

--- Page 1195 ---
enjoys a preference claim on dividends but also has the option to convert to an ordinary shareholder
with unlimited participation in earnings.
Callable Preference Shares
Callable preference shares permit the company at its option to call or redeem the outstanding
preference shares at specified future dates and at stipulated prices. Many preference issues are callable.
The company usually sets the call or redemption price slightly above the original issuance price and
commonly states it in terms related to the par value. The callable feature permits the company to use
the capital obtained through the issuance of such shares until the need has passed or it is no longer
advantageous.
The existence of a call price or prices tends to set a ceiling on the market price of the preference shares
unless they are convertible into ordinary shares. When a company redeems preference shares, it must
pay any dividends in arrears.
Redeemable Preference Shares
Recently, more and more issuances of preference shares have features that make the securities more
like debt (legal obligation to pay) than an equity instrument. For example, redeemable preference
shares have a mandatory redemption period or a redemption feature that the issuer cannot control.
Previously, public companies were not permitted to report these debt-like preference share issues in
equity, but they were not required to report them as a liability either. There were concerns about
classification of these debt-like securities, which may have been reported as equity or in the
“mezzanine” section of statements of financial position between equity and debt. There also was
diversity in practice as to how dividends on these securities were reported. IFRS requires debt-like
securities, like redeemable preference shares, to be classified as liabilities and to be measured and
accounted similarly to liabilities. [3]
Accounting for and Reporting of Preference Shares
The accounting for preference shares at issuance is similar to that for ordinary shares. A company
allocates proceeds between the par value of the preference shares and share premium. To illustrate,
assume that Bishop plc issues 10,000 shares of £10 par value preference shares for £12 cash per share.
Bishop records the issuance as follows.
Cash
120,000
Share Capital—Preference
100,000
Share Premium—Preference
20,000
Thus, Bishop maintains separate accounts for these different classes of shares.
Companies consider convertible preference shares as a part of equity. In addition, when exercising
convertible preference shares, there is no theoretical justification for recognition of a gain or loss. A
company recognizes no gain or loss when dealing with shareholders in their capacity as business
owners. Instead, the company employs the book value method: debit Share Capital—Preference,
along with any related Share Premium—Preference; credit Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium
—Ordinary (if an excess exists).
Preference shares generally have no maturity date. Therefore, no legal obligation exists to pay the
preference shareholder. As a result, companies classify preference shares as part of equity. Companies
generally report preference shares at par value as the first item in the equity section. They report any
excess over par value as part of share premium. They also consider dividends on preference shares as a
distribution of income and not an expense. Companies must disclose the pertinent rights of the
preference shares outstanding. [4]

--- Page 1196 ---
Reacquisition of Shares
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
Companies often buy back their own shares. In fact, as indicated in Illustration 15.4, share buybacks
for companies in the FTSE 100 almost exceed share issuances in recent years and exceed dividends as a
form of distribution to shareholders. For example, oil company BP (GBR) purchased $90 million
worth of shares in 2018, and rival Royal Dutch Shell (NLD/GBR) announced a $25 billion share
buyback scheme that would run until 2020.
ILLUSTRATION 15.4 Share Issuances/Buybacks 2004–2018
Companies purchase their outstanding shares for several reasons:
1. To provide tax-efficient distributions of excess cash to shareholders. Tax rates on sales
of shares to the company by the shareholders are often much lower than the ordinary tax rate for
many investors.
2. To increase earnings per share and return on equity. Reducing both shares outstanding
and equity often enhances certain performance ratios. For example, Siemens (DEU) announced
its €4 billion buyback as part of its efforts to improve profitability. However, strategies to hype
performance measures might increase performance in the short run, but these tactics add no real
long-term value.
3. To provide shares for employee compensation contracts or to meet potential merger
needs. Honeywell Inc. (USA) reported that it would use part of its purchase of one million
ordinary shares for employee share option contracts. Other companies acquire shares to have
them available for business acquisitions.
4. To thwart takeover attempts or to reduce the number of shareholders. By reducing the
number of shares held by the public, existing owners and managements bar “outsiders” from
gaining control or significant influence.
5. To make a market in the shares. As one company executive noted, “Our company is trying to
establish a floor for its shares.” Purchasing shares in the marketplace creates a demand. This may
stabilize the share price or, in fact, increase it. For example, HTC (TWN) indicated its recent
treasury share transaction was one of the options for boosting its sagging share price.

--- Page 1197 ---
Some publicly held corporations have chosen to “go private,” that is, to eliminate public (outside)
ownership entirely by purchasing all of their outstanding shares. Companies often accomplish such a
procedure through a leveraged buyout (LBO), in which the company borrows money to finance the
share repurchases.
After reacquiring shares, a company may either retire them or hold them in the treasury for reissue. If
not retired, such shares are referred to as treasury shares. Technically, treasury shares are a
corporation’s own shares, reacquired after having been issued and fully paid.
Treasury shares are not an asset. When a company purchases treasury shares, a reduction occurs
in both assets and equity. It is inappropriate to imply that a corporation can own a part of itself. A
corporation may sell treasury shares to obtain funds, but that does not make treasury shares a
statement of financial position asset (see Underlying Concepts). When a corporation buys back
some of its own outstanding shares, it has not acquired an asset; the buyback reduces net assets.
Underlying Concepts
As we indicated in Chapter 2, an asset should have probable future economic benefits. Treasury
shares simply reduce ordinary shares outstanding.
The possession of treasury shares does not give the corporation the right to vote, to exercise
preemptive rights as a shareholder, to receive cash dividends, or to receive assets upon corporate
liquidation. Treasury shares are essentially the same as unissued ordinary shares. No one
advocates classifying unissued ordinary shares as an asset in the statement of financial position.3
Purchase of Treasury Shares
Companies use two general methods of handling treasury shares in the accounts: the cost method and
the par value method. Both methods are generally acceptable.
The cost method results in debiting the Treasury Shares account for the reacquisition cost and in
reporting this account as a deduction from equity on the statement of financial position.
The par (stated) value method records all transactions in treasury shares at their par value and
reports the treasury shares as a deduction from share capital only.
No matter which method a company uses, most jurisdictions consider the cost of the treasury shares
acquired as a restriction on retained earnings.
Because just about all companies use the cost method to account for treasury shares, we illustrate its
use here. This method derives its name from the fact that a company maintains the Treasury Shares
account at the cost of the shares purchased.4 Under the cost method, the company debits the Treasury
Shares account for the cost of the shares acquired. Upon reissuance of the shares, it credits the account
for this same cost. The price received for the shares when issued originally does not affect the entries
to record the acquisition and reissuance of the treasury shares.
To illustrate, assume that Pacific Company issued 100,000 shares of $1 par value ordinary shares at a
price of $10 per share. In addition, it has retained earnings of $300,000. Illustration 15.5 shows the
equity section on December 31, 2021, before purchase of treasury shares.

--- Page 1198 ---
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, $1 par, 100,000 shares issued and outstanding
$ 100,000
Share premium—ordinary
900,000
Retained earnings
300,000
Total equity
$1,300,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.5 Equity with No Treasury Shares
On January 20, 2022, Pacific acquires 10,000 of its shares at $11 per share. Pacific records the
reacquisition as follows.
January 20, 2022
Treasury Shares 110,000
Cash
110,000
Note that Pacific debits Treasury Shares for the cost of the shares purchased. The original account,
Share Capital—Ordinary, is not affected because the number of issued shares does not change. The
same is true for the Share Premium—Ordinary account. Pacific then deducts treasury shares to
determine total equity.
Illustration 15.6 shows the equity section for Pacific after purchase of the treasury shares.
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, $1 par value, 100,000 shares issued and 90,000 outstanding $ 100,000
Share premium—ordinary
900,000
Retained earnings
300,000
Less: Cost of treasury shares (10,000 shares)
110,000
Total equity
$1,190,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.6 Equity with Treasury Shares
Pacific subtracts the cost of the treasury shares from the total of share capital—ordinary, share
premium—ordinary, and retained earnings. It therefore reduces equity. Many jurisdictions require a
corporation to restrict retained earnings for the cost of treasury shares purchased. The restriction
keeps intact the corporation’s capital. When the corporation sells the treasury shares, it lifts the
restriction.
Pacific discloses both the number of shares issued (100,000) and the number of shares in the treasury
(10,000). The difference is the number of shares outstanding (90,000). The term outstanding
shares means the number of issued shares that shareholders own.
Sale of Treasury Shares
Companies usually reissue or retire treasury shares. When selling treasury shares, the accounting for
the sale depends on the price. If the selling price of the treasury shares equals its cost, the company
records the sale of the shares by debiting Cash and crediting Treasury Shares. In cases where the
selling price of the treasury shares is not equal to cost, then accounting for treasury shares sold above
cost differs from the accounting for treasury shares sold below cost. However, the sale of treasury
shares either above or below cost increases both total assets and equity.
Sale of Treasury Shares Above Cost
When the selling price of the treasury shares exceeds its cost, a company credits the difference to Share
Premium—Treasury. To illustrate, assume that Pacific acquired 10,000 treasury shares at $11 per
share. It now sells 1,000 shares at $15 per share on March 10. Pacific records the entry as follows.

--- Page 1199 ---
March 10, 2022
March 10, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $15)
15,000
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
11,000
Share Premium—Treasury
4,000
There are two reasons why Pacific does not credit $4,000 to Gain on Sale of Treasury Shares: (1) gains
on sales occur when selling assets; treasury shares are not an asset, and (2) a gain or loss should not
be recognized from share transactions with its own shareholders. Thus, Pacific should not include
share premium arising from the sale of treasury shares in the measurement of net income. Instead, it
lists share premium from treasury shares separately on the statement of financial position.
Sale of Treasury Shares Below Cost
When a corporation sells treasury shares below its cost, it usually debits the excess of the cost over
selling price to Share Premium—Treasury. Thus, if Pacific sells an additional 1,000 treasury shares on
March 21 at $8 per share, it records the sale as follows.
March 21, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $8)
8,000
Share Premium—Treasury
3,000
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
11,000
We can make several observations based on the two sale entries (sale above cost and sale below cost):
(1) Pacific credits Treasury Shares at cost in each entry; (2) Pacific uses Share Premium—Treasury for
the difference between the cost and the resale price of the shares, and (3) neither entry affects Share
Capital—Ordinary.
After eliminating the credit balance in Share Premium—Treasury, the corporation debits any additional
excess of cost over selling price to Retained Earnings. To illustrate, assume that Pacific sells an
additional 1,000 shares at $8 per share on April 10. Illustration 15.7 shows the balance in the Share
Premium—Treasury account (before the April 10 purchase).
Share Premium—Treasury
Mar. 21 3,000 Mar. 10 4,000
Balance 1,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.7 Treasury Share Transactions in Share Premium—Treasury
Account
In this case, Pacific debits $1,000 of the excess to Share Premium—Treasury. It debits the remainder to
Retained Earnings. The entry is as follows.
April 10, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $8)
8,000
Share Premium—Treasury
1,000
Retained Earnings
2,000
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
11,000
Retiring Treasury Shares
The board of directors may approve the retirement of treasury shares. This decision results in
cancellation of the treasury shares and a reduction in the number of issued shares. Retired treasury
shares have the status of authorized and unissued shares. The accounting effects are similar to the sale
of treasury shares except that corporations debit applicable equity accounts related to the

--- Page 1200 ---
retired shares instead of cash. For example, if a corporation originally sells the shares at par, it debits
Share Capital—Ordinary for the par value per share. If it originally sells the shares at $3 above par
value, it also debits Share Premium—Ordinary for $3 per share at retirement.
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Signals to Buy?
As indicated in Illustration 15.4, companies have steadily increased repurchases of their own
shares in recent years. And why not? Few company announcements are more beloved by investors
than those that indicate a share buyback is on the horizon. Following a lull in buybacks during the
financial crisis of 2008, companies have increased their buyback programs. For example,
buybacks by the companies in the FTSE 100 increased steadily before and after the financial
crisis, with major companies such as BP (GBR), Royal Dutch Shell (NLD/GBR), and Burberry
(GBR), as well as insurers Allianz (CHE) and Zurich (CHE), making some of the bigger
repurchases.
Increases in buybacks are music to investors’ ears because it indicates that executives at some of
the companies have confidence that better times are ahead. The buybacks also show that cash
reserves are healthy enough for companies to believe they not only have enough cash to cover
their day-to-day functions but also enough to spare to allow for generous buybacks. In fact,
market experts often look to share buybacks as a buy signal. That strategy is not surprising if you
look at the performance of the companies that did buybacks. For example, in one study, buyback
companies outperformed similar companies without buybacks by an average of 23 percent. In a
recent three-year period, companies followed by BuybackLetter.com (USA) were up 16.4
percent, while the broader market index was up just 7.1 percent. Why the premium? The
conventional wisdom is that companies that buy back shares believe their shares are undervalued.
Thus, analysts view the buyback announcement as an important piece of inside information about
future company prospects.
Sources: Data from G. Howes, “FTSE 100 Share Buy-Backs on the Increase: Is This a Good Sign?” Director of Finance Online
(February 5, 2013); T. Delaney and J. Sohn, “More Buybacks,” Naples Daily News (June 28, 2015); and C. Cornish, “UK Share
Buybacks Accelerate as Market Lags Behind,” Financial Times (March 16, 2018).
Dividend Policy
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
Determining the proper amount of dividends to pay is a difficult financial management decision.
Companies that are paying dividends are extremely reluctant to reduce or eliminate their dividend.
They fear that the securities market might view this action negatively. As a consequence, companies
that have been paying cash dividends will make every effort to continue to do so. In addition, the type
of shareholder the company has (taxable or non-taxable, retail investor or institutional investor) plays
a large role in determining dividend policy.5
Very few companies pay dividends in amounts equal to their legally available retained
earnings. The major reasons are as follows.
1. To maintain agreements (bond covenants) with specific creditors to retain all or a portion of the
earnings in the form of assets, or to build up additional protection against possible loss.
2. To meet corporation requirements that earnings equivalent to the cost of treasury shares
purchased be restricted against dividend declarations.

--- Page 1201 ---
3. To retain assets that would otherwise be paid out as dividends, in order to finance growth or
expansion. This is sometimes called internal financing, reinvesting earnings, or “plowing” the
profits back into the business.
4. To smooth out dividend payments from year to year by accumulating earnings in good years, and
using such accumulated earnings as a basis for dividends in bad years.
5. To build up a cushion or buffer against possible losses or errors in the calculation of profits.
The reasons above are self-explanatory except for the second. The laws of some jurisdictions require
that the corporation restrict its contributed capital from distribution to shareholders, to protect against
loss for creditors.6 The applicable law determines the legality of a dividend.
Financial Condition and Dividend Distributions
Effective management of a company requires attention to more than the legality of dividend
distributions. Management must also consider economic conditions, and most importantly, liquidity.
Assume an extreme situation as shown in Illustration 15.8.
Statement of Financial Position
Plant assets €500,000 Share capital
€400,000
€500,000 Retained earnings
100,000
€500,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.8 Statement of Financial Position, Showing a Lack of Liquidity
The depicted company has a retained earnings credit balance. Unless restricted, it can declare a
dividend of €100,000. But because all its assets are plant assets used in operations, payment of a cash
dividend of €100,000 would require the sale of plant assets or borrowing.
Even if a statement of financial position shows current assets, as in Illustration 15.9, the question
remains as to whether the company needs those cash assets for other purposes.
Statement of Financial Position
Plant assets €460,000 Share capital
€400,000
Cash
100,000 Retained earnings
100,000 €500,000
€560,000 Current liabilities
60,000
€560,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.9 Statement of Financial Position, Showing Cash but Minimal
Working Capital
The existence of current liabilities strongly implies that the company needs some of the cash to meet
current debts as they mature. In addition, day-to-day cash requirements for payrolls and other
expenditures not included in current liabilities also require cash.
Thus, before declaring a dividend, management must consider availability of funds to pay the
dividend. A company should not pay a dividend unless both the present and future financial position
warrant the distribution.
Types of Dividends
Companies generally base dividend distributions either on accumulated profits (that is, retained
earnings) or on some other equity item such as share premium. Dividends are of the following types.
1. Cash dividends.
2. Property dividends.

--- Page 1202 ---
3. Liquidating dividends.
4. Share dividends.
Although commonly paid in cash, companies occasionally pay dividends in shares or some other asset.
All dividends, except for share dividends, reduce the total equity in the corporation. When
declaring a share dividend, the corporation does not pay out assets or incur a liability. It issues
additional shares to each shareholder and nothing more.
The natural expectation of any shareholder who receives a dividend is that the corporation has
operated successfully. As a result, he or she is receiving a share of its profits. A company should
disclose a liquidating dividend—that is, a dividend not based on retained earnings—to the
shareholders so that they will not misunderstand its source.
Cash Dividends
The board of directors votes on the declaration of cash dividends. Upon approval of the resolution,
the board declares a dividend. Before paying it, however, the company must prepare a current list of
shareholders. For this reason, there is usually a time lag between declaration and payment. For
example, the board of directors might approve a resolution at the January 10 (date of declaration)
meeting and declare it payable February 5 (date of payment) to all shareholders of record January 25
(date of record).7 In this example, the period from January 10 to January 25 gives time for the
company to complete and register any transfers in process. The time from January 25 to February 5
provides an opportunity for the transfer agent or accounting department, depending on who does this
work, to prepare a list of shareholders as of January 25 and to prepare and mail dividend checks.
A declared cash dividend is a liability. Because payment is generally required very soon, it
is usually a current liability. Companies use the following entries to record the declaration and
payment of an ordinary dividend payable in cash. For example, Roadway Freight Corp. on June 10
declared a cash dividend of 50 cents a share on 1.8 million shares payable July 16 to all shareholders of
record June 24. The entries for this dividend are shown in Illustration 15.10.
ILLUSTRATION 15.10 Cash Dividend Entries
To set up a ledger account that shows the amount of dividends declared during the year, Roadway
Freight might debit Cash Dividends Declared instead of Retained Earnings at the time of declaration. It
then closes this account to Retained Earnings at year-end.
A company may declare dividends either as a certain percentage of par, such as a 6 percent dividend on
preference shares, or as an amount per share, such as 60 cents per share on no-par ordinary shares. In
the first case, the rate multiplied by the par value of outstanding shares equals the total dividend. In
the second, the dividend equals the amount per share multiplied by the number of shares outstanding.
Companies do not declare or pay cash dividends on treasury shares because they are not
outstanding.

--- Page 1203 ---
Dividend policies vary among corporations. Some companies take pride in a long, unbroken string of
quarterly dividend payments. They would lower or pass the dividend only if forced to do so by a
sustained decline in earnings or a critical shortage of cash.
“Growth” companies, on the other hand, pay little or no cash dividends because their policy is to
expand as rapidly as internal and external financing permit. For example, Ophir Energy plc (GBR)
does not pay cash dividends to its ordinary shareholders so that the cash can be used in exploration and
production. Investors in these growth companies hope that the price of their shares will appreciate in
value. The investors will then realize a profit when they sell their shares. Many companies focus more
on increasing share price, share repurchase programs, and corporate earnings than on dividend payout.

--- Page 1204 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Dividends Up, Dividends Down
An investment strategy focusing on shares with the potential of increasing dividends has been a
mainstay for many investors. Said one market watcher, “Investors too often overlook the
importance of dividends, particularly the contribution to total return from reinvested dividends.…
Dividends also can provide a good hedge against inflation in the form of a growing stream of
income.” One study, the results of which are summarized in the following table, indicates the
importance of dividends for investment returns.
Average Annual Returns and 
Volatility by Dividend Policy
Returns
Dividend growers and initiators
9.52%
Dividend payers
8.74
No change in dividend policy
7.15
Dividend non-payers
1.61
Dividend cutters and eliminators
−0.31
Equal-weighted S&P 500 Index
7.03
Sources: Ned Davis Research (December 2012); stocks within the S&P 500 Index.
Companies that raised their dividends are classified as dividend growers and initiators, as opposed
to other companies that are classified as dividend cutters and eliminators. The study also
identified companies with no change in dividend policy. The table supports the advice to keep an
eye on dividend growth. What the table tells us is that companies that grew or initiated a dividend
have experienced the highest returns relative to other shares. That is, over a multiyear investment
horizon, an investment of $100 would have grown to $4,169, while dividend non-payers only
increased to $193. In addition, the higher performers offered lower volatility of returns in all
market environments.
More recent data on the dividends and investments returns continue to tell the same story. From
1958 through 2018, a portfolio with the top 20 percent of S&P 500 companies ranked by dividend
yield and weighted by market capitalization outperformed the overall S&P 500 by 2.13 percentage
points annually, according to Greenrock Research (USA).
Indeed, central banks’ low interest rate monetary policies are adding to the current continuing
appeal of dividend securities. That’s because lower interest rates push bond yields lower, making
shares more attractive to investors. While most investors buy dividend shares for the steady
income stream, that is not the only benefit these investments offer, financial experts say. Indeed,
research shows that dividend shares often outperform their non-dividend-paying counterparts
over longer periods. That is partly because dividend payments account for a substantial portion of
the securities market’s total return. Researcher Morningstar Inc. (USA) calculates that
dividends were responsible for 19 percent of the S&P 500 index’s return over the past five years.
Other research indicates much higher portions for longer periods, thanks to the compounding of
reinvested dividends.
Thus, companies that grow dividends are signaling confidence about future earnings and are most
likely to perform well throughout market cycles—this makes them good candidates for long-term
growth.
Sources: Data from R. Evans, “Here Are the American and European Companies with Incredible Track Records of Raising
Their Dividends,” The Telegraph (November 4, 2013); Hartford Funds, “The Power of Dividends: Past, Present, and Future,”
Second Quarter 2014 White Paper (2014); and D. Weil, “Why Dividend Stocks Are Popular Again,” Wall Street Journal (March
3, 2019).

--- Page 1205 ---
Property Dividends
Dividends payable in assets of the corporation other than cash are called property dividends or
dividends in kind. Property dividends may be merchandise, real estate, or investments, or whatever
form the board of directors designates. Gold Bullion Development Corporation (CAN) has a long-
standing practice of paying dividends in gold instead of cash. Because of the obvious difficulties of
divisibility of units and delivery to shareholders, the usual property dividend is in the form of securities
of other companies that the distributing corporation holds as an investment.
When declaring a property dividend, the corporation should remeasure at fair value the property
it will distribute, recognizing any gain or loss as the difference between the property’s fair value
and carrying value at date of declaration. The corporation may then record the declared dividend as a
debit to Retained Earnings (or Property Dividends Declared) and a credit to Property Dividends
Payable, at an amount equal to the fair value of the distributed property. Upon distribution of the
dividend, the corporation debits Property Dividends Payable and credits the account containing the
distributed asset (restated at fair value). Illustration 15.11 presents a property dividend situation.
Entries for Property Dividends
Facts: Tsen Ltd. transferred to shareholders some of its investments in securities with a carrying
value of HK$1,250,000 by declaring a property dividend on December 28, 2021, to be distributed on
January 30, 2022, to shareholders of record on January 15, 2022.
Question: If, at the date of declaration, the securities have a fair value of HK$2,000,000,
what entries does Tsen make at the dates of declaration and distribution?
Solution: Tsen makes the following entries.
At date of declaration (December 28, 2021)
Equity Investments
750,000
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
750,000
Retained Earnings (Property Dividends Declared) 2,000,000
Property Dividends Payable
2,000,000
 
At date of distribution (January 30, 2022)
Property Dividends Payable
2,000,000
Equity Investments
2,000,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.11 Property Dividend Entries
Liquidating Dividends
Some corporations use amounts paid in by shareholders as a basis for dividends. Without proper
disclosure of this fact, shareholders may erroneously believe the corporation has been operating at a
profit. To avoid this type of deception, intentional or unintentional, a clear statement of the source of
every dividend should accompany the dividend check.
Dividends based on other than retained earnings are sometimes described as liquidating dividends.
This term implies that such dividends are a return of the shareholder’s investment rather than of
profits. In other words, any dividend not based on earnings reduces amounts paid in by

--- Page 1206 ---
shareholders, and to that extent, it is a liquidating dividend. Companies in the extractive
industries may pay dividends equal to the total of accumulated income and depletion. The portion of
these dividends in excess of accumulated income represents a return of part of the shareholder’s
investment. Illustration 15.12 presents a liquidating dividend example.
Entries for Liquidating Dividends
Facts: McChesney Mines issued a “dividend” to its ordinary shareholders of £1,200,000. The cash
dividend announcement noted that shareholders should consider £900,000 as income and the
remainder a return of capital.
Question: What are the entries for McChesney at declaration date and at the date of
distribution?
Solution: McChesney Mines records the dividend as follows.
At date of declaration
Retained Earnings
900,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
300,000
Dividends Payable
1,200,000
 
At date of payment
Dividends Payable
1,200,000
Cash
1,200,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.12 Liquidating Dividend Entries
In some cases, management simply decides to cease business and declares a liquidating dividend. In
these cases, liquidation may take place over a number of years to ensure an orderly and fair sale of
assets. For example, when Overseas National Airways (USA) dissolved, it agreed to pay a
liquidating dividend to its shareholders over a period of years equivalent to $8.60 per share. Each
liquidating dividend payment in such cases reduces the amount paid in by shareholders.
Share Dividends and Share Splits
Share Dividends
Companies sometimes issue a share dividend. In this case, the company distributes no assets.
Each shareholder maintains exactly the same proportionate interest in the corporation and the same
total book value after the company issues the share dividend. Of course, the book value per share is
lower because each shareholder holds more shares.
A share dividend therefore is the issuance by a corporation of its own shares to its shareholders on a
pro rata basis, without receiving any consideration. In recording a share dividend, some believe that the
company should transfer the par value of the shares issued as a dividend from retained earnings to
share capital.8
To illustrate a share dividend, assume that Vine plc has outstanding 100,000 shares of £1 par value
ordinary shares and retained earnings of £50,000. If Vine declares a 10 percent share dividend, it
issues 10,000 additional shares to current shareholders. The fair value of the shares at the time of the
share dividend is £8. Given this information, the entry is:
At date of declaration

--- Page 1207 ---
At date of declaration
Retained Earnings (Share Dividend Declared) 10,000
Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable
10,000
Two important points should be noted about this entry. First, the par value, not the fair value, is used
to record the share dividend. Second, the share dividend does not affect any asset or liability. The entry
merely reflects a reclassification of equity. If Vine prepares a statement of financial position between
the dates of declaration and distribution, it should show the ordinary share dividend distributable in
the equity section as an addition to share capital—ordinary (whereas it shows cash or property
dividends payable as current liabilities).
When issuing the shares, the entry is:
At date of distribution
Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable 10,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
10,000
No matter what the fair value is at the time of the share dividend, each shareholder retains the same
proportionate interest in the corporation.
Some applicable laws and exchange rules specifically prohibit the issuance of share dividends on
treasury shares. In those jurisdictions that permit treasury shares to participate in the distribution
accompanying a share dividend or share split, the planned use of the treasury shares influences
corporate practice. For example, if a corporation issues treasury shares in connection with employee
share options, the treasury shares may participate in the distribution because the corporation usually
adjusts the number of shares under option for any share dividends or splits. But no useful purpose is
served by issuing additional shares to the treasury shares without a specific purpose, since they are
essentially equivalent to authorized but unissued shares.
To continue with our example of the effect of the share dividend, note in Illustration 15.13 that the
share dividend does not change the total equity. Also note that it does not change the proportion of the
total shares outstanding held by each shareholder.

--- Page 1208 ---
Before dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 100,000 shares of £1 par
£100,000
Retained earnings
50,000
Total equity
£150,000
Shareholders’ interests:
A. 40,000 shares, 40% interest, book value
£60,000
B. 50,000 shares, 50% interest, book value
75,000
C. 10,000 shares, 10% interest, book value
15,000
£150,000
After declaration but before distribution of 10% share dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 100,000 shares at £1 par
£100,000
Ordinary share dividend distributable, 10,000 shares at £1 par
10,000
Retained earnings (£50,000 – £10,000)
40,000
Total equity
£150,000
After declaration and distribution of 10% share dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 110,000 shares at £1 par
£110,000
Retained earnings (£50,000 – £10,000)
40,000
Total equity
£150,000
Shareholders’ interest:
A. 44,000 shares, 40% interest, book value
£60,000
B. 55,000 shares, 50% interest, book value
75,000
C. 11,000 shares, 10% interest, book value
15,000
£150,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.13 Effects of Share Dividends
Share Splits
If a company has undistributed earnings over several years and accumulates a sizable balance in
retained earnings, the market value of its outstanding shares likely increases. Shares issued at prices
less than £50 a share can easily attain a market price in excess of £200 a share. The higher the market
price of a share, however, the less readily some investors can purchase it.
The managements of many corporations believe that better public relations depend on wider
ownership of the company shares. They therefore target a market price sufficiently low to be within
range of the majority of potential investors. To reduce the market price of each share, they use the
common device of a share split. For example, after its share price increased significantly, Arcam AB
(SWE) announced a split of its shares 4-for-1. The split should reduce the share price, leading to wider
distribution of shares at lower trading prices.
From an accounting standpoint, Arcam records no entry for a share split. However, it enters a
memorandum note to indicate the changed par value of the shares and the increased number of shares.
Illustration 15.14 shows the lack of change in equity for a 2-for-1 share split on 100,000 shares of €1
par value, with the par being halved upon issuance of the additional shares.

--- Page 1209 ---
Equity Before 2-for-1 Split
Equity After 2-for-1 Split
Share capital—ordinary,
Share capital—ordinary,
100,000 shares at €1 par €100,000
200,000 shares at €.50 par €100,000
Retained earnings
50,000 Retained earnings
50,000
€150,000
€150,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.14 Effects of a Share Split
Share Split and Share Dividend Differentiated
From a legal standpoint, a share split differs from a share dividend. How? A share split increases the
number of shares outstanding and decreases the par or stated value per share. A share dividend,
although it increases the number of shares outstanding, does not decrease the par value;
thus, it increases the total par value of outstanding shares.
The reasons for issuing a share dividend are numerous and varied. Share dividends can be primarily a
publicity gesture because some consider share dividends as dividends. Another reason is that
the company may simply wish to retain profits in the business by capitalizing a part of retained
earnings. In such a situation, it makes a transfer on declaration of a share dividend from earned capital
to contributed capital.
A company may also use a share dividend, like a share split, to increase the marketability of the shares,
although marketability is often a secondary consideration. That is, a share dividend has the same effect
on market price as a share split. However, as discussed earlier, a share dividend does not alter the par
value per share.
Illustration 15.15 summarizes and compares the effects in the statement of financial position and
related items of various types of dividends and share splits.
Effect on:
Declaration and
Distribution of
Declaration of Cash
Dividend
Payment of Cash
Dividend
Share
Dividend
Share
Split
Retained earnings
Decrease
–0–
Decreasea
–0–
Share capital
–0–
–0–
Increasea
–0–
Share premium
–0–
–0–
–0–
–0–
Total equity
Decrease
–0–
–0–
–0–
Working capital
Decrease
–0–
–0–
–0–
Total assets
–0–
Decrease
–0–
–0–
Number of shares
outstanding
–0–
–0–
Increase
Increase
aPar or stated value of shares.
ILLUSTRATION 15.15 Effects of Dividends and Share Splits on Financial Statement
Elements
Presentation and Analysis of Equity
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Indicate how to present and analyze equity.

--- Page 1210 ---
Presentation of Equity
Statement of Financial Position
Illustration 15.16 shows a comprehensive equity section from the statement of financial position of
Frost SpA that includes the equity items we discussed in this chapter.9
Frost should disclose the pertinent rights and privileges of the various securities outstanding. For
example, companies must disclose all of the following: dividend and liquidation preferences,
participation rights, call prices and dates, conversion or exercise prices and pertinent dates, sinking
fund requirements, unusual voting rights, and significant terms of contracts to issue additional shares.
Liquidation preferences should be disclosed in the equity section of the statement of financial position,
rather than in the notes to the financial statements, to emphasize the possible effect of this restriction
on future cash flows.
Frost SpA
Equity
December 31, 2022
Share capital—preference, €100 par value, 7% cumulative, 100,000 shares
authorized, 30,000 shares issued and outstanding
€3,000,000
Share capital—ordinary, no par, stated value €10 per share, 500,000 shares
authorized, 400,000 shares issued
4,000,000
Ordinary share dividend distributable
200,000 € 7,200,000
Share premium—preference
150,000
Share premium—ordinary
840,000
990,000
Retained earnings
4,360,000
Treasury shares (2,000 ordinary shares)
(190,000)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(360,000)
Total equity
€12,000,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.16 Comprehensive Equity Presentation
Disclosure of Restrictions on Retained Earnings
Many companies restrict retained earnings or dividends, without any formal journal entries. Such
restrictions are best disclosed by note. Parenthetical notations are sometimes used, but restrictions
imposed by bond indentures and loan agreements commonly require an extended explanation. Notes
provide a medium for more complete explanations and free the financial statements from abbreviated
notations. The note disclosure should reveal the source of the restriction, pertinent provisions, and the
amount of retained earnings subject to restriction or the amount not restricted.
Restrictions may be based on the retention of a certain retained earnings balance, the ability to
maintain certain working capital requirements, additional borrowing, and other considerations. The
example from the annual report of Samsung (KOR) in Illustration 15.17 shows a note disclosing
potential restrictions on retained earnings and dividends.

--- Page 1211 ---
Samsung
21. RETAINED EARNINGS
Retained earnings as of December 31 consist of the following:
(in millions of Korean won)
Current Year
Prior Year
Appropriated
Legal reserve:
Earned surplus reserve1
₩ 450,789
₩ 450,789
Discretionary reserve:
Reserve for improvement of financial structure
204,815
204,815
Reserve for business rationalization
9,512,101
8,512,101
Reserve for overseas market development
510,750
510,750
Reserve for overseas investment losses
164,962
164,982
Reserve for research and human resource development
26,936,458
22,936,458
Reserve for export losses
167,749
167,749
Reserve for loss on disposal of treasury stock
3,100,000
2,550,000
Reserve for capital expenditure
8,816,905
8,216,439
49,864,529
43,714,083
Unappropriated
5,555,022
7,351,091
Total
₩55,419,551
₩51,065,174
1The Commercial Code of the Republic of Korea requires the Company to appropriate as a legal reserve, an amount equal to a minimum
of 10% of annual cash dividends declared, until the reserve equals 50% of its issued capital stock. The reserve is not available for the
payment of cash dividends, but may be transferred to capital stock through a resolution of the Board of Directors or used to reduce
accumulated deficit, if any, with the ratification of the shareholders.
ILLUSTRATION 15.17 Disclosure of Restrictions on Retained Earnings and Dividends
Presentation of Statement of Changes in Equity
Companies are also required to present a statement of changes in equity. The statement of changes
in equity includes the following.
1. Total comprehensive income for the period, showing separately the total amounts attributable to
owners of the parent and to non-controlling interests.
2. For each component of equity, the effects of retrospective application or retrospective restatement.
3. For each component of equity, a reconciliation between the carrying amount at the beginning and
the end of the period, separately disclosing changes resulting from:
a. Profit or loss.
b. Each item of other comprehensive income.
c. Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners, showing separately contributions by
and distributions to owners and changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries that do not
result in a loss of control.
A statement of changes in equity for BASF Group (DEU) is presented in Illustration 15.18.

--- Page 1212 ---
In addition, BASF is required to present, either in the statement of changes in equity or in the notes,
the amount of dividends recognized as distributions to owners during the period and the related
amount per share. [5]
BASF Group
Statement of Equity
(in millions of euros)
Number of
shares
outstanding
Subscribed
capital
Capital
reserves
Retained
earnings
Other
comprehensive
income
Equity
attributable
to
shareholders
of BASF
Noncontrollin
interests
As of
December 31,
2017
918,478,694
1,176
3,117
34,826
(5,282)
33,837
91
IFRS 9
transition
effect
—
—
—
21
(49)
(28)
(2
As of
January 1,
2018
918,478,694
1,176
3,117
34,847
(5,331)
33,809
91
Effects of
acquisitions
achieved in
stages
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Dividend
paid
—
—
—
(2,847)
—
(2,847)
(174
Income after
taxes
—
—
—
4,707
—
4,707
27
Changes to
income and
expense
recognized
directly in
equity
—
—
—
—
(608)
(608)
2
Changes in
scope of
consolidation
and other
changes
—
—
1
(8)
—
(7)
1
As of
December
31, 2018
918,478,694
1,176
3,118
36,699
(5,939)
35,054
1,05
ILLUSTRATION 15.18 Statement of Changes in Equity

--- Page 1213 ---
Analysis
Analysts use equity ratios to evaluate a company’s profitability and long-term solvency. We discuss and
illustrate the following three ratios below.
1. Return on ordinary share equity.
2. Payout ratio.
3. Book value per share.
Return on Ordinary Share Equity
The return on ordinary share equity (or return on equity) measures profitability from the ordinary
shareholders’ viewpoint. This ratio shows how many dollars of net income the company earned for
each dollar invested by the owners. Return on equity (ROE) also helps investors judge the worthiness
of a share when the overall market is not doing well.
Return on equity equals net income less preference dividends, divided by average ordinary
shareholders’ equity. For example, assume that Gerber’s Inc. had net income of $360,000, that it
declared and paid preference dividends of $54,000, and average ordinary shareholders’ equity of
$2,550,000. Illustration 15.19 shows how to compute Gerber’s ratio.
Return on Ordinary Share Equity =
=
= 12%
ILLUSTRATION 15.19 Computation of Return on Ordinary Share Equity
As shown in Illustration 15.19, when preference shares are present, income available to ordinary
shareholders equals net income less preference dividends.
A company can improve its return on ordinary share equity through the prudent use of debt or
preference share financing. Trading on the equity describes the practice of using borrowed money
or issuing preference shares in hopes of obtaining a higher rate of return on the money used. Ordinary
shareholders win if return on the assets is higher than the cost of financing these assets. When this
happens, the return on ordinary share equity will exceed the return on total assets. In short, the
company is “trading on the equity at a gain.” In this situation, the money obtained from bondholders or
preference shareholders earns enough to pay the interest or preference dividends and leaves a profit
for the ordinary shareholders. On the other hand, if the cost of the financing is higher than the rate
earned on the assets, the company is trading on equity at a loss and shareholders lose.
Payout Ratio
Another ratio of interest to investors, the payout ratio, is the ratio of cash dividends to net income. If
preference shares are outstanding, this ratio equals cash dividends paid to ordinary shareholders,
divided by net income available to ordinary shareholders. For example, assume that Troy SA has cash
dividends of €100,000 and net income of €500,000, and no preference shares outstanding.
Illustration 15.20 shows the payout ratio computation.
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Average Ordinary Shareholders’ Equity
$360,000  − $54,000
$2,550,000

--- Page 1214 ---
Payout Ratio =
=
= 20%
ILLUSTRATION 15.20 Computation of Payout Ratio
Recently, the payout ratio has plummeted. In 2000, more than half of earnings were converted to
dividends. In 2018, just 43 percent of the earnings of global public companies was distributed via
dividends.10
Book Value per Share
Another basis for evaluating net worth is found in the book value or equity value per share. Book
value per share is the amount each share would receive if the company were liquidated on the basis
of amounts reported on the statement of financial position. However, the figure loses much of
its relevance if the valuations on the statement of financial position fail to approximate fair value of
the assets. Book value per share equals ordinary shareholders’ equity divided by outstanding ordinary
shares. Assume that Chen Ltd.’s ordinary shareholders’ equity is HK$1,000,000 and that it has
100,000 shares of ordinary shares outstanding. Illustration 15.21 shows its book value per share
computation.
Book Value per Share =
=
  =  HK$10 per share
ILLUSTRATION 15.21 Computation of Book Value per Share
Cash Dividends
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
€100,000
€500,000
Ordinary Shareholders’ Equity
Outstanding Shares
HK$1,000,000
100,000

--- Page 1215 ---
APPENDIX 15A
Dividend Preferences and Book Value per Share
Dividend Preferences
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Discuss the different types of preference share dividends and their effect on book value per share.
Illustrations 15A.1 to 15A.4 indicate the effects of various dividend preferences on dividend
distributions to ordinary and preference shareholders. Assume that in 2022, Mason Company is to
distribute €50,000 as cash dividends, its outstanding ordinary shares have a par value of €400,000,
and its 6 percent preference shares have a par value of €100,000. Mason would distribute dividends to
each class, employing the assumptions given, as follows.
1. If the preference shares are non-cumulative and non-participating:
Preference Ordinary
Total
6% of €100,000
€6,000
€ 6,000
The remainder to ordinary
       €44,000
44,000
Totals
€6,000 €44,000 €50,000
ILLUSTRATION 15A.1 Dividend Distribution, Non-Cumulative and Non-Participating
Preference
2. If the preference shares are cumulative and non-participating, and Mason Company did not pay
dividends on the preference shares in the preceding two years:
Preference Ordinary
Total
Dividends in arrears, 6% of €100,000 for 2 years
€12,000
€12,000
Current year’s dividend, 6% of €100,000
6,000
6,000
The remainder to ordinary
          €32,000
32,000
Totals
€18,000 €32,000 €50,000
ILLUSTRATION 15A.2 Dividend Distribution, Cumulative and Non-Participating
Preference Shares, with Dividends in Arrears
3. If the preference shares are non-cumulative and are fully participating:11

--- Page 1216 ---
Preference Ordinary
Total
Current year’s dividend, 6%
€ 6,000 €24,000 €30,000
Participating dividend of 4%
4,000
16,000
20,000
Totals
€10,000 €40,000 €50,000
The participating dividend was determined as follows:
Current year’s dividend:
Preference, 6% of €100,000 = € 6,000
Ordinary, 6% of €400,000
= 24,000
€30,000
Amount available for participation (€50,000 – €30,000)
€20,000
Par value of shares that are to participate (€100,000 + €400,000) €500,000
Rate of participation (€20,000 ÷ €500,000)
4%
Participating dividend:
Preference, 4% of €100,000
€ 4,000
Ordinary, 4% of €400,000
16,000
€20,000
ILLUSTRATION 15A.3 Dividend Distribution, Non-Cumulative and Fully Participating
Preference Shares
4. If the preference shares are cumulative and are fully participating, and Mason Company did not
pay dividends on the preference shares in the preceding two years:
Preference Ordinary
Total
Dividends in arrears, 6% of €100,000 for 2 years
€12,000
€12,000
Current year’s dividend, 6%
6,000 €24,000
30,000
Participating dividend, 1.6% (€8,000 ÷ €500,000)
1,600
6,400
8,000
Totals
€19,600 €30,400 €50,000
ILLUSTRATION 15A.4 Dividend Distribution, Cumulative and Fully Participating
Preference Shares, with Dividends in Arrears

--- Page 1217 ---
Book Value per Share
Book value per share in its simplest form is computed as net assets divided by outstanding shares at
the end of the year. The computation of book value per share becomes more complicated if a company
has preference shares in its capital structure. For example, if preference dividends are in arrears, if the
preference shares are participating, or if preference shares have a redemption or liquidating value
higher than its carrying amount, the company must allocate retained earnings between the preference
and ordinary shareholders in computing book value.
For example, the situation in Illustration 15A.5 assumes that no preference dividends are in arrears
and that the preference shares are not participating. Now assume that the same facts exist, except that
the 5 percent preference shares are cumulative, participating shares up to 8 percent, and that dividends
for three years before the current year are in arrears. Illustration 15A.6 shows how to compute the
book value of the ordinary shares, assuming that no action has yet been taken concerning dividends for
the current year.
Equity
Preference Ordinary
Preference shares, 5%
€300,000
Ordinary shares
€400,000
Share premium—ordinary
37,500
Retained earnings
162,582
Totals
€300,000 €600,082
Shares outstanding
4,000
Book value per share
€150.02
ILLUSTRATION 15A.5 Computation of Book Value per Share—No Dividends in Arrears
Equity
Preference Ordinary
Preference shares, 5%
€300,000
Ordinary shares
€400,000
Share premium—ordinary
37,500
Retained earnings:
Dividends in arrears (3 years at 5% a year)
45,000
Current year requirement at 5%
15,000
20,000
Participating—additional 3%
9,000
12,000
Remainder to ordinary
        
61,582
Totals
€369,000 €531,082
Shares outstanding
4,000
Book value per share
€132.77
ILLUSTRATION 15A.6 Computation of Book Value per Share—with Dividends in
Arrears, Participating
As indicated, retained earnings is allocated between preference and ordinary shareholders in
computing book value per share.
In connection with the book value computation, the analyst must know how to handle the following
items: the number of authorized and unissued shares, the number of treasury shares on hand, any
commitments with respect to the issuance of unissued shares or the reissuance of treasury shares, and
the relative rights and privileges of the various types of shares authorized. As an example, if the

--- Page 1218 ---
liquidating value of the preference shares is higher than its carrying amount, the liquidating amount
should be used in the book value computation.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
book value per share
callable preference shares
cash dividends
contributed (paid-in) capital
convertible preference shares
cost method
cumulative preference shares
dividend in arrears
earned capital
equity
leveraged buyout (LBO)
liquidating dividends
lump-sum sales
no-par shares
ordinary shares
par (stated) value method
participating preference shares
payout ratio
preemptive right
preference shares
property dividends
redeemable preference shares
residual interest
retained earnings
return on ordinary share equity
share dividends
share premium
share split
stated value
statement of changes in equity
trading on the equity
treasury shares
Learning Objectives Review

--- Page 1219 ---
1 Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
Among the specific characteristics of the corporate form that affect accounting are the (1) influence of
corporate law, (2) use of the share system, and (3) development of a variety of ownership interests. In
the absence of restrictive provisions, each ordinary share carries the right to share proportionately in
(1) profits and losses, (2) management (the right to vote for directors), (3) corporate assets upon
liquidation, and (4) any new issues of shares of the same class (called the preemptive right).
Equity is classified into two categories: contributed capital and earned capital. Contributed capital
(paid-in capital) describes the total amount paid in as share capital. Put another way, it is the amount
that shareholders advance to the corporation for use in the business. Contributed capital includes
items such as the par value of all outstanding shares and premiums less any discounts on issuance.
Earned capital is the capital that develops if the business operates profitably; it consists of all
undistributed income that remains invested in the company.
Accounts are kept for the following different types of shares. Par value shares: (a) Share Capital—
Preference or Share Capital—Ordinary, (b) Share Premium—Preference and Share Premium—Ordinary.
No-par shares: Share Capital—Ordinary or Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium—Ordinary if
stated value used. For shares issued in combination with other securities (lump-sum sales), the two
methods of allocation available are (a) the proportional method and (b) the incremental method. When
issuing shares for services or property other than cash, the company should record the exchange at the
fair value of the property or services received unless that fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Otherwise, use the fair value of the shares issued.
Preference shares are a special class of shares that possess certain preferences or features not
possessed by the ordinary shares. The features that are most often associated with preference share
issues are (1) preference as to dividends, (2) preference as to assets in the event of liquidation, (3)
convertible into ordinary shares, (4) callable at the option of the corporation, and (5) non-voting. At
issuance, the accounting for preference shares is similar to that for ordinary shares. When convertible
preference shares are converted, a company uses the book value method. It debits Share Capital—
Preference, along with any related Share Premium—Preference, and credits Share Capital—Ordinary
and Share Premium—Ordinary (if an excess exists).
2 Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
The cost method is generally used in accounting for treasury shares. This method derives its name
from the fact that a company maintains the Treasury Shares account at the cost of the shares
purchased. Under the cost method, a company debits the Treasury Shares account for the cost of the
shares acquired and credits it for this same cost upon reissuance. The price received for the shares
when originally issued does not affect the entries to record the acquisition and reissuance of the
treasury shares.
3 Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
The incorporation laws normally provide information concerning the legal restrictions related to the
payment of dividends. Corporations rarely pay dividends in an amount equal to the legal limit. This is
due, in part, to the fact that companies use assets represented by undistributed earnings to finance
future operations of the business. If a company is considering declaring a dividend, it must ask two
preliminary questions. (1) Is the condition of the corporation such that the dividend is legally
permissible? (2) Is the condition of the corporation such that a dividend is economically sound?
Dividends are of the following types: (1) cash dividends, (2) property dividends, (3) liquidating
dividends (dividends based on other than retained earnings), and (4) share dividends (the issuance by a
corporation of its own shares to its shareholders on a pro rata basis but without receiving
consideration).

--- Page 1220 ---
When declaring a share dividend, a company debits Retained Earnings at the par value of the shares it
distributes. The entry includes a credit to Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable at par value times the
number of shares. A share dividend is a capitalization of retained earnings that reduces retained
earnings. The par value per share and total equity remain unchanged with a share dividend, and all
shareholders retain their same proportionate share of ownership. A share split (or reverse share split)
results in an increase or decrease in the number of shares outstanding, with a corresponding decrease
or increase in the par or stated value per share. No accounting entry is required for a share split.
4 Indicate how to present and analyze equity.
The equity section of a statement of financial position includes share capital, share premium, and
retained earnings. A company may also have additional items such as treasury shares, accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss), and non-controlling interest. Companies are required to present a
statement of changes in equity. Ratios that use equity amounts are return on ordinary share equity,
payout ratio, and book value per share.
*5 Discuss the different types of preference share dividends and their effect on book
value per share.
The dividend preferences of preference shares affect the dividends paid to shareholders. Preference
shares can be (1) cumulative or non-cumulative, and (2) fully participating, partially participating, or
non-participating. If preference dividends are in arrears, if the preference shares are participating, or if
preference shares have a redemption or liquidation value higher than its carrying amount, allocate
retained earnings between preference and ordinary shareholders in computing book value per share.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions, and a full
glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
D’Ouville Company was formed on July 1, 2021. It was authorized to issue 500,000 shares of €10 par
value ordinary shares and 100,000 shares of 4%, €25 par value, cumulative and non-participating
preference shares. D’Ouville Company has a July 1–June 30 fiscal year. The following information
relates to the equity accounts of D’Ouville Company.
Ordinary Shares
Prior to the 2023–2024 fiscal year, D’Ouville Company had 110,000 shares of outstanding ordinary
shares issued as follows.
1. 95,000 shares were issued for cash on July 1, 2021, at €31 per share.
2. On July 24, 2021, 5,000 shares were exchanged for a plot of land which cost the seller €70,000
in 2015 and had an estimated fair value of €220,000 on July 24, 2021.
3. 10,000 shares were issued on March 1, 2023, for €42 per share.
During the 2023–2024 fiscal year, the following transactions regarding ordinary shares took place.
Nov.
30,
2023
D’Ouville purchased 2,000 of its own shares on the open market at €39 per share. D’Ouville
uses the cost method for treasury shares.
Dec. D’Ouville declared a 5% share dividend for shareholders of record on January 15, 2024, to be

--- Page 1221 ---
15,
2023
issued on January 31, 2024. D’Ouville was having a liquidity problem and could not afford a
cash dividend at the time. D’Ouville’s ordinary shares were selling at €52 per share on
December 15, 2023.
June
20,
2024
D’Ouville sold 500 of its own ordinary shares that it had purchased on November 30, 2023,
for €21,000.
Preference Shares
D’Ouville issued 100,000 preference shares at €44 per share on July 1, 2022.
Cash Dividends
D’Ouville generally declares cash dividends in December and June, with payment being made to
shareholders of record in the following month. The cash dividends which have been declared since
inception of the company through June 30, 2024, are shown below.
Declaration Date Ordinary Shares Preference Shares
12/15/22 €0.30 per share €0.50 per share
6/15/23 €0.30 per share €0.50 per share
12/15/23
—
€0.50 per share
No cash dividends were declared during June 2024 due to the company’s liquidity problems.
Retained Earnings
As of June 30, 2023, D’Ouville’s retained earnings account had a balance of €550,000. For the fiscal
year ending June 30, 2024, D’Ouville reported net income of €120,000.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position, including appropriate notes, for
D’Ouville Company as of June 30, 2024, as it should appear in its annual report to the shareholders.
Solution
D’Ouville Company
Partial Statement of Financial Position
June 30, 2024
Equity
4% Share capital—preference, €25 par value, cumulative and non-participating, 100,000
shares authorized, 100,000 shares issued and outstanding (Note A)
€2,500,000
Share capital—ordinary, €10 par value, 500,000 shares authorized, 115,400 shares issued,
with 1,500 shares held in the treasury
1,154,000
Share premium—preference
1,900,000
Share premium—ordinary
2,485,000*
Share premium—treasury
1,500
Retained earnings
Less: Treasury shares, 1,500 shares at cost
Total equity
Note A: D’Ouville Company is in arrears on the preference shares in the amount of €100,000.
*Share premium—ordinary:
Issue of 95,000 shares × (€31 − €10)

--- Page 1222 ---
D’Ouville Company
Partial Statement of Financial Position
June 30, 2024
Issue of 5,000 shares for plot of land (€220,000 − €50,000)
10,000 shares issued (3/1/20) [10,000 × (€42 − €10)]
**Retained Earnings:
+
+
−
−
−
−
=
=
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities, and many
more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendix to the
chapter.
Questions
1. In the absence of restrictive provisions, what are the basic rights of shareholders of a corporation?
2. Why is a preemptive right important?
3. Distinguish between ordinary and preference shares.
4. Why is the distinction between contributed capital (paid-in capital) and retained earnings
important?
5. Explain each of the following terms: authorized ordinary shares, unissued ordinary shares, issued
ordinary shares, outstanding ordinary shares, and treasury shares.
6. What is meant by par value, and what is its significance to shareholders?
7. Describe the accounting for the issuance for cash of no-par value ordinary shares at a price in excess
of the stated value of the ordinary shares.
8. Explain the difference between the proportional method and the incremental method of allocating
the proceeds of lump-sum sales of share capital.
9. What are the different bases for share valuation when assets other than cash are received for issued
shares?
10. Explain how underwriting costs and accounting and legal fees associated with the issuance of
shares should be recorded.
11. For what reasons might a company purchase its own shares?
12. Discuss the propriety of showing:
a. Treasury shares as an asset.
b. “Gain” or “loss” on sale of treasury shares as additions to or deductions from income.
c. Dividends received on treasury shares as income.
13. What features or rights may alter the character of preference shares?
14. Kim Inc. recently noted that its 4% preference shares and 4% participating preference shares are
both cumulative and have priority as to dividends up to 4% of their par value. Its participating
preference shares participate equally with the ordinary shares in any dividends in excess of 4%. What is
meant by the term participating? Cumulative?
Beginning balance
€550,000
Income
€120,000
Share dividend
€54,000
Preference dividend
€50,000
Ret. earnings, end
€566,000

--- Page 1223 ---
15. Where in the financial statements are preference shares normally reported?
16. List five elements included in equity.
17. BMG purchases 10,000 shares of its own previously issued €10 par ordinary shares for €290,000.
Assuming the shares are held in the treasury with intent to reissue, what effect does this transaction
have on (a) net income, (b) total assets, (c) retained earnings, and (d) total equity?
18. Indicate how each of the following accounts should be classified in the equity section.
a. Share Capital—Ordinary
b. Retained Earnings
c. Share Premium—Ordinary
d. Treasury Shares
e. Share Premium—Treasury
f. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
g. Share Capital—Preference
19. What factors influence the dividend policy of a company?
20. What are the principal considerations of a board of directors in making decisions involving
dividend declarations? Discuss briefly.
21. Dividends are sometimes said to have been paid “out of retained earnings.” What is the error, if
any, in that statement?
22. Distinguish among cash dividends, property dividends, liquidating dividends, and share dividends.
23. Describe the accounting entry for a share dividend, if any. Describe the accounting entry for a
share split, if any.
24. Share splits and share dividends may be used by a corporation to change the number of its shares
outstanding.
a. From an accounting viewpoint, explain how the share split differs from an ordinary share
dividend.
b. How should a share dividend that has been declared but not yet issued be classified in a statement
of financial position? Why?
25. The following comment appeared in the notes of Mona Corporation’s annual report: “Such
distributions, representing proceeds from the sale of Sarazan, Inc., were paid in the form of partial
liquidating dividends and were in lieu of a portion of the Company’s ordinary cash dividends.” How
would a partially liquidating dividend be accounted for in the financial records?
26. This comment appeared in the annual report of Christensen Inc.: “The Company could pay cash or
property dividends on the Class A ordinary shares without paying cash or property dividends on the
Class B ordinary shares. But if the Company pays any cash or property dividends on the Class B
ordinary shares, it would be required to pay at least the same dividend on the Class A ordinary shares.”
How is a property dividend accounted for in the financial records?
27. For what reasons might a company restrict a portion of its retained earnings?
28. How are restrictions of retained earnings reported?
*29. Wang Corp. had $100,000 of 7%, $20 par value preference shares and 12,000 shares of $25 par
value ordinary shares outstanding throughout 2022.

--- Page 1224 ---
a. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $64,000 and that the preference shares are
not cumulative but are fully participating, ordinary shareholders should receive 2022 dividends
totaling what amount?
b. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $64,000 and that the preference shares are
fully participating and cumulative with preference dividends in arrears for 2021, preference
shareholders should receive 2022 dividends totaling what amount?
c. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $30,000; that the preference shares are
cumulative, non-participating, and were issued on January 1, 2021; and that $5,000 of preference
dividends were declared and paid in 2021, the ordinary shareholders should receive 2022 dividends
totaling what amount?
Brief Exercises
BE15.1 (LO 1) Kaymer SA issued 300 shares of €10 par value ordinary shares for €4,500. Prepare
Kaymer’s journal entry.
BE15.2 (LO 1) Swarten AG issued 600 shares of no-par ordinary shares for €8,200. Prepare Swarten’s
journal entry if (a) the shares have no stated value, and (b) the shares have a stated value of €2 per
share.
BE15.3 (LO 1, 2, 4) Wilco SE has the following equity balances at December 31, 2022.
Share capital—ordinary, €5 par value € 510,000
Treasury shares
90,000
Retained earnings
2,340,000
Share premium—ordinary
1,320,000
Prepare Wilco’s December 31, 2022, equity section in the statement of financial position.
BE15.4 (LO 1) Ravonette Corporation issued 300 shares of $10 par value ordinary shares and 100
shares of $50 par value preference shares for a lump sum of $13,500. The ordinary shares have a
market price of $20 per share, and the preference shares have a market price of $90 per share. Prepare
the journal entry to record the issuance.
BE15.5 (LO 1) On February 1, 2022, Gruber plc issued 3,000 shares of its £5 par value ordinary shares
for land worth £31,000. Prepare the February 1, 2022, journal entry.
BE15.6 (LO 1) Moonwalker Corporation issued 2,000 shares of its $10 par value ordinary shares for
$60,000. Moonwalker also incurred $1,500 of costs associated with issuing the shares. Prepare
Moonwalker’s journal entry to record the issuance of the company’s shares.
BE15.7 (LO 2) Sprinkle SE has outstanding 10,000 shares of €10 par value ordinary shares. On July 1,
2022, Sprinkle reacquired 100 shares at €87 per share. On September 1, Sprinkle reissued 60 shares at
€90 per share. On November 1, Sprinkle reissued 40 shares at €83 per share. Prepare Sprinkle’s
journal entries to record these transactions using the cost method.
BE15.8 (LO 2) Arantxa S.A. has outstanding 20,000 shares of R$5 par value ordinary shares. On
August 1, 2022, Arantxa reacquired 200 shares at R$80 per share. On November 1, Arantxa reissued
the 200 shares at R$70 per share. Arantxa had no previous treasury share transactions. Prepare
Arantxa’s journal entries to record these transactions using the cost method.
BE15.9 (LO 1) Hinges SpA issued 500 shares of €100 par value preference shares for €61,500.
Prepare Hinges’s journal entry.
BE15.10 (LO 3) Woolford Inc. declared a cash dividend of $1 per share on its 2 million outstanding
shares. The dividend was declared on August 1, payable on September 9 to all shareholders of record on
August 15. Prepare all journal entries necessary on those three dates.

--- Page 1225 ---
BE15.11 (LO 3) Silva SpA owns shares of Costa S.A. classified as a trading equity investment. At
December 31, 2022, the trading equity investment was carried in Silva’s accounting records at its cost
of R$875,000, which equals its fair value. On September 21, 2023, when the fair value of the
investment was R$1,200,000, Silva declared a property dividend whereby the Costa securities are to be
distributed on October 23, 2023, to shareholders of record on October 8, 2023. Prepare all journal
entries necessary on those three dates.
BE15.12 (LO 3) Zhang Mining Company declared on April 20 a dividend of ¥500,000,000, payable on
June 1. Of this amount, ¥125,000,000 is a return of capital. Prepare the April 20 and June 1 entries for
Zhang.
BE15.13 (LO 3) Green Day Corporation has outstanding 400,000 shares of $10 par value ordinary
shares. The corporation declares a 5% share dividend when the fair value is $65 per share. Prepare the
journal entries for Green Day Corporation for both the date of declaration and the date of distribution.
BE15.14 (LO 3) Use the information from BE15.13 but assume Green Day Corporation declared a
100% share dividend rather than a 5% share dividend. Prepare the journal entries for both the date of
declaration and the date of distribution.
*BE15.15 (LO 5) Nottebart AG has outstanding 10,000 shares of €100 par value, 6% preference
shares and 60,000 shares of €10 par value ordinary shares. The preference shares were issued in
January 2022, and no dividends were declared in 2022 or 2023. In 2024, Nottebart declares a cash
dividend of €300,000. How will the dividend be shared by ordinary and preference shareholders if the
preference is (a) non-cumulative and (b) cumulative?
Exercises
E15.1 (LO 1) (Recording the Issuances of Ordinary Shares) During its first year of operations,
Sitwell SE had the following transactions pertaining to its ordinary shares.
Jan.
10
Issued 80,000 shares for cash at €6 per share.
Mar.
1
Issued 5,000 shares to attorneys in payment of a bill for €35,000 for services rendered in
helping the company to incorporate.
July
1
Issued 30,000 shares for cash at €8 per share.
Sept.
1
Issued 60,000 shares for cash at €10 per share.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries for these transactions, assuming that the ordinary shares have a par
value of €3 per share.
b. Briefly discuss how the entries in part (a) will change if the shares are no-par with a stated value of
€2 per share.
E15.2 (LO 1) (Recording the Issuance of Ordinary and Preference Shares) Abernathy
Corporation was organized on January 1, 2022. It is authorized to issue 10,000 shares of 8%, $50 par
value preference shares, and 500,000 shares of no-par ordinary shares with a stated value of $2 per
share. The following share transactions were completed during the first year.
Jan.
10
Issued 80,000 ordinary shares for cash at $5 per share.
Mar.
1
Issued 5,000 preference shares for cash at $108 per share.
Apr. Issued 24,000 ordinary shares for land. The asking price of the land was $90,000; the fair value

--- Page 1226 ---
1 of the land was $80,000.
May
1
Issued 80,000 ordinary shares for cash at $7 per share.
Aug.
1
Issued 10,000 ordinary shares to attorneys in payment of their bill of $50,000 for services
rendered in helping the company organize.
Sept.
1
Issued 10,000 ordinary shares for cash at $9 per share.
Nov.
1
Issued 1,000 preference shares for cash at $112 per share.
Instructions
Prepare the journal entries to record the above transactions.
E15.3 (LO 1) (Shares Issued for Land) Twenty-five thousand shares reacquired by Pierce plc for
£48 per share were exchanged for undeveloped land that has an appraised value of £1,700,000. At the
time of the exchange, the ordinary shares were trading at £60 per share on an organized exchange.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the acquisition of land, assuming that the purchase of the
shares was originally recorded using the cost method.
b. Briefly identify the possible alternatives (including those that are totally unacceptable) for
quantifying the cost of the land and briefly support the choice you feel is best.
E15.4 (LO 1) (Lump-Sum Sale of Shares with Bonds) Fogelberg Industries is a regional
company, whose securities are thinly traded. Fogelberg has issued 10,000 units. Each unit consists of a
CHF500 par, 12% subordinated debenture and 10 shares of CHF5 par ordinary shares. The investment
banker has retained 400 units as the underwriting fee. The other 9,600 units were sold to outside
investors for cash at CHF850 per unit. Prior to this sale, the 2-week ask price of ordinary shares was
CHF40 per share. Twelve percent is a reasonable market yield for the debentures, and therefore the par
value of the bonds is equal to the fair value.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record Fogelberg’s transaction, under the following conditions.
(Round to the nearest CHF.)
1. Employing the incremental method.
2. Employing the proportional method, assuming the recent price quote on the ordinary shares
reflects fair value.
b. Briefly explain which method is, in your opinion, the better method.
E15.5 (LO 1) (Lump-Sum Sales of Ordinary and Preference Shares) Hartman SE issues 500
shares of €10 par value ordinary shares and 100 shares of €100 par value preference shares for a lump
sum of €100,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for the issuance when the fair value of the ordinary shares is €168 each
and fair value of the preference shares is €210 each. (Round to the nearest euro.)
b. Prepare the journal entry for the issuance when only the fair value of the ordinary shares (€170
per share) is known.

--- Page 1227 ---
E15.6 (LO 1, 2) (Share Issuances and Repurchase) Loxley Corporation is authorized to issue
50,000 shares of $10 par value ordinary shares. During 2022, Loxley took part in the following selected
transactions.
1. Issued 5,000 shares at $45 per share, less costs related to the issuance of the shares totaling
$7,000.
2. Issued 1,000 shares for land appraised at $50,000. The shares were actively traded on a national
securities exchange at approximately $46 per share on the date of issuance.
3. Purchased 500 treasury shares at $44 per share. The treasury shares purchased were issued in
2021 at $40 per share.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record item 1.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record item 2.
c. Prepare the journal entry to record item 3 using the cost method.
E15.7 (LO 2) (Effect of Treasury Share Transactions on Financials) Goosen SA has
outstanding 40,000 shares of €5 par ordinary shares which had been issued at €30 per share. Goosen
then entered into the following transactions.
1. Purchased 5,000 treasury shares at €45 per share.
2. Resold 500 of the treasury shares at €40 per share.
3. Resold 2,000 of the treasury shares at €49 per share.
Instructions
Use the following code to indicate the effect each of the three transactions has on the financial
statement categories listed in the table below, assuming Goosen SA uses the cost method: I = Increase;
D = Decrease; and NE = No effect.
# Assets Liabilities Equity Share Premium Retained Earnings Net Income
1
2
3
E15.8 (LO 1, 5) (Preference Share Entries and Dividends) Weisberg Corporation has 10,000
shares of $100 par value, 6%, preference shares and 50,000 ordinary shares of $10 par value
outstanding at December 31, 2022.
Instructions
Answer the questions in each of the following independent situations.
a. If the preference shares are cumulative and dividends were last paid on the preference shares on
December 31, 2019, what are the dividends in arrears that should be reported on the December 31,
2022, statement of financial position? How should these dividends be reported?
b. If the preference shares are convertible into seven shares of $10 par value ordinary shares and
3,000 shares are converted, what entry is required for the conversion, assuming the preference
shares were issued at par value?
c. If the preference shares were issued at $107 per share, how should the preference shares be
reported in the equity section?

--- Page 1228 ---
E15.9 (LO 1, 2) (Correcting Entries for Equity Transactions) Davison plc recently hired a new
accountant with extensive experience in accounting for partnerships. Because of the pressure of the
new job, the accountant was unable to review what he had learned earlier about corporation
accounting. During the first month, he made the following entries for the corporation’s ordinary
shares.
May
2 Cash
192,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
192,000
(Issued 12,000 shares of £10 par value ordinary shares at £16 per
share)
10 Cash
600,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
600,000
(Issued 10,000 shares of £30 par value preference shares at £60 per
share)
15 Share Capital—Ordinary
14,000
Cash
14,000
(Purchased 1,000 ordinary shares for the treasury at £14 per share)
31 Cash
8,500
Share Capital—Ordinary
5,000
Gain on Sale of Shares
3,500
(Sold 500 treasury shares at £17 per share)
Instructions
On the basis of the explanation for each entry, prepare the entries that should have been made for the
ordinary share transactions.
E15.10 (LO 1, 2, 4) (Analysis of Equity Data and Equity Section Preparation) For a recent 2-
year period, the statement of financial position of Jiang Group showed the following equity data at
December 31 (amounts in millions).
2023
2022
Share premium—ordinary
HK$ 891
HK$ 817
Share capital—ordinary
545
540
Retained earnings
7,167
5,226
Treasury shares
(1,428)
(918)
Total equity
HK$7,175 HK$5,665
Ordinary shares issued
218
216
Ordinary shares authorized
500
500
Treasury shares
34
27
Instructions
a. Answer the following questions.
1. What is the par value of the ordinary shares?
2. What is the cost per treasury share at December 31, 2023, and at December 31, 2022?
b. Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position at December 31, 2023.

--- Page 1229 ---
E15.11 (LO 3) (Effect of Equity Items on the Statement of Financial Position) The following
are selected transactions that may affect equity.
1. Recorded accrued interest earned on a note receivable.
2. Declared and distributed a share split.
3. Declared a cash dividend.
4. Recorded a retained earnings restriction.
5. Recorded the expiration of insurance coverage that was previously recorded as prepaid insurance.
6. Paid the cash dividend declared in item 3 above.
7. Recorded accrued interest expense on a note payable.
8. Declared a share dividend.
9. Distributed the share dividend declared in item 8.
Instructions
In the following table, indicate the effect each of the nine transactions has on the financial statement
elements listed. Use the following code:
I = Increase D = Decrease NE = No effect
Item Assets Liabilities Equity Share Premium Retained Earnings Net Income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E15.12 (LO 3) (Cash Dividend and Liquidating Dividend) Addison Corporation has 10 million
shares of ordinary shares issued and outstanding. On June 1, the board of directors voted a 60 cents per
share cash dividend to shareholders of record as of June 14, payable June 30.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for each of the dates above, assuming the dividend represents a
distribution of earnings.
b. How would the entry differ if the dividend were a liquidating dividend?
E15.13 (LO 3) (Share Split and Share Dividend) The ordinary shares of Otuk Holding are
currently selling at 110 per share. The directors wish to reduce the share price and increase share
volume prior to a new issue. The per share par value is 10; book value is 70 per share. Five million
shares are issued and outstanding.
Instructions
a. Prepare the necessary journal entries assuming that the board votes a 2-for-1 share split.
b. Prepare the necessary journal entries assuming that the board votes a 100% share dividend.

--- Page 1230 ---
c. Briefly discuss the accounting and securities market differences between these two methods of
increasing the number of shares outstanding.
E15.14 (LO 3) (Entries for Share Dividends and Share Splits) The equity accounts of Lawrence
Group have the following balances on December 31, 2022.
Share Capital—Ordinary, €10 par, 200,000 shares issued and outstanding €2,000,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
1,200,000
Retained Earnings
5,600,000
Shares of Lawrence Group are currently selling at €37.
Instructions
Prepare the appropriate journal entries for each of the following cases.
a. A share dividend of 5% is declared and issued.
b. A share dividend of 100% is declared and issued.
c. A 2-for-1 share split is declared and issued.
E15.15 (LO 3) (Dividend Entries) The following data were taken from the statement of financial
position accounts of Murless SA on December 31, 2022.
Current Assets
R$540,000
Investments
624,000
Share Capital—Ordinary (par value R$10)
600,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
150,000
Retained Earnings
840,000
Instructions
Prepare the required journal entries for the following unrelated items.
a. A 5% share dividend is declared and distributed at a time when the market price of the shares is
R$39 per share.
b. The par value of the ordinary shares is reduced to R$2 with a 5-for-1 share split.
c. A dividend is declared January 5, 2023, and paid January 25, 2023, in bonds held as held for
collection investment. The bonds have a cost of R$90,000 and a fair value of R$125,000.
E15.16 (LO 1, 2, 3) (Computation of Retained Earnings) The following information has been
taken from the ledger accounts of Choi Corporation (all amounts in thousands).
Total Income Since Incorporation
₩287,000
Total Cash Dividends Paid
60,000
Total Value of Share Dividends Distributed
40,000
Gains on Treasury Share Transactions
18,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
32,000
Instructions
Determine the current balance of retained earnings.
E15.17 (LO 1, 4) (Equity Section) Teller SE’s post-closing trial balance at December 31, 2022, was
as follows.

--- Page 1231 ---
Teller SE
Post-Closing Trial Balance
December 31, 2022
Teller SE
Post-Closing Trial Balance
December 31, 2022
Dr.
Cr.
Accounts payable
€ 310,000
Accounts receivable
€ 480,000
Accumulated depreciation—buildings
185,000
Allowance for doubtful accounts
30,000
Bonds payable
700,000
Buildings
1,450,000
Cash
190,000
Dividends payable (preference shares—cash)
4,000
Inventory
560,000
Land
400,000
Prepaid expenses
40,000
Retained earnings
201,000
Share capital—ordinary (€1 par value)
200,000
Share capital—preference (€50 par value)
500,000
Share premium—ordinary
1,000,000
Share premium—treasury
160,000
Treasury shares (ordinary at cost)
170,000
Total
€3,290,000 €3,290,000
At December 31, 2022, Teller had the following number of ordinary and preference shares.
Ordinary Preference
Authorized
600,000
60,000
Issued
200,000
10,000
Outstanding 190,000
10,000
The dividends on preference shares are €4 cumulative. In addition, the preference shares have a
preference in liquidation of €50 per share.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of Teller’s statement of financial position at December 31, 2022.
E15.18 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 (Dividends and Equity Section) Elizabeth Company reported the
following amounts in the equity section of its December 31, 2022, statement of financial position.
Share capital—preference, 8%, $100 par (10,000 shares authorized, 2,000 shares issued) $200,000
Share capital—ordinary, $5 par (100,000 shares authorized, 20,000 shares issued)
100,000
Share premium—preference
125,000
Retained earnings
450,000
Total
$875,000
During 2023, Elizabeth Company took part in the following transactions concerning equity.

--- Page 1232 ---
1. Paid the annual 2022 $8 per share dividend on preference shares and a $2 per share dividend on
ordinary shares. These dividends had been declared on December 31, 2022.
2. Purchased 2,700 shares of its own outstanding ordinary shares for $40 per share. Elizabeth uses
the cost method.
3. Reissued 700 treasury shares for land with a fair value of $30,000.
4. Issued 500 preference shares at $105 per share.
5. Declared a 10% share dividend on the outstanding ordinary shares when the shares are selling for
$45 per share.
6. Issued the share dividend.
7. Declared the annual 2023 $8 per share dividend on preference shares and the $2 per share
dividend on ordinary shares. These dividends are payable in 2024.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries to record the transactions described above.
b. Prepare the December 31, 2023, equity section of the statement of financial position. Assume 2023
net income was $330,000.
E15.19 (LO 4) (Comparison of Alternative Forms of Financing) Shown below is the equity and
liabilities section of the statement of financial position for Ingalls plc and Wilder Ltd. Each has assets
totaling £4,200,000.
Ingalls plc
Wilder Ltd.
Share capital—ordinary (£20 par)
£2,000,000 Share capital—ordinary (£20 par)
£2,900,000
Retained earnings (Cash dividends,
£220,000)
700,000
Retained earnings (Cash dividends,
£328,000)
700,000
Non-current liabilities, 10%
1,200,000 Current liabilities
600,000
Current liabilities
300,000
£4,200,000
£4,200,000
For the year, each company has earned the same income before interest and taxes.
Ingalls plc Wilder Ltd.
Income from operations
£1,200,000 £1,200,000
Interest expense
120,000
–0–
Income before income tax
1,080,000
1,200,000
Income tax (40%)
432,000
480,000
Net income
£ 648,000
£ 720,000
At year-end, the market price of an Ingalls’ share was £101, and Wilder’s was £63.50. Assume
statement of financial position amounts are representative for the entire year.
Instructions
a. Which company is more profitable in terms of return on total assets?
b. Which company is more profitable in terms of return on ordinary share equity?
c. Which company has the greater net income per share? Neither company issued or reacquired
shares during the year.

--- Page 1233 ---
d. From the point of view of net income, is it advantageous to the shareholders of Ingalls plc to have
the non-current liabilities outstanding? Why?
e. What is the book value per share for each company?
E15.20 (LO 4) (Trading on the Equity Analysis) Presented below is information from the annual
report of DeVries Plastics.
Operating income
€
532,150
Bond interest expense
135,000
Income before income tax
397,150
Income tax
183,432
Net income
€
213,718
Bonds payable
€1,500,000
Share capital—ordinary
875,000
Retained earnings
575,000
Instructions
a. Compute the return on ordinary share equity and the rate of interest paid on bonds. (Assume
balances for debt and equity accounts approximate averages for the year.)
b. Is DeVries Plastics trading on the equity successfully? Explain.
*E15.21 (LO 5) (Preference Dividends) The outstanding share capital of Pennington Corporation
consists of 2,000 shares of $100 par value, 6% preference, and 5,000 shares of $50 par value ordinary.
Instructions
Assuming that the company has retained earnings of $70,000, all of which is to be paid out in
dividends, and that preference dividends were not paid during the 2 years preceding the current year,
determine how much each class of shares should receive under each of the following conditions.
a. The preference shares are non-cumulative and non-participating.
b. The preference shares are cumulative and non-participating.
c. The preference shares are cumulative and participating. (Round dividend rate percentages to four
decimal places.)
*E15.22 (LO 5) (Preference Dividends) Martinez SA’s ledger shows the following balances on
December 31, 2022.
Share Capital—Preference, 5%—€10 par value, outstanding 20,000 shares € 200,000
Share Capital—Ordinary—€100 par value, outstanding 30,000 shares
3,000,000
Retained Earnings
630,000
Instructions
Assuming that the directors decide to declare total dividends in the amount of €266,000, determine
how much each class of shares should receive under each of the conditions stated below. One year’s
dividends are in arrears on the preference shares.
a. The preference shares are cumulative and fully participating.
b. The preference shares are non-cumulative and non-participating.
c. The preference shares are non-cumulative and are participating in distributions in excess of a 7%
dividend rate on the ordinary shares.

--- Page 1234 ---
*E15.23 (LO 5) (Preference Share Dividends) Hagar Ltd. has outstanding 2,500 shares of £100
par, 6% preference shares and 15,000 shares of £10 par value ordinary. The schedule below shows the
amount of dividends paid out over the last 4 years.
Instructions
Allocate the dividends to each type of shares under assumptions (a) and (b). Express your answers in
per share amounts using the format shown below.
Assumptions
(a)
Preference, non-cumulative, and non-
participating
(b)
Preference, cumulative,and fully
participating
Year
Paid-
out
Preference
Ordinary
Preference
Ordinary
2021 £12,000
2022 £26,000
2023 £52,000
2024 £76,000
*E15.24 (LO 5) (Computation of Book Value per Share) Johnstone Inc. began operations in
January 2021 and reported the following results for each of its 3 years of operations.
2021 $260,000 net loss 2022 $40,000 net loss 2023 $700,000 net income
At December 31, 2023, Johnstone Inc. share capital accounts were as follows.
Share Capital—Preference, 6% cumulative, par value $100; authorized, issued, and
outstanding 5,000 shares
$500,000
Share Capital—Ordinary, par value $1.00; authorized 1,000,000 shares; issued and
outstanding 750,000 shares
$750,000
Johnstone Inc. has never paid a cash or share dividend. There has been no change in the share capital
accounts since Johnstone began operations. The country law permits dividends only from retained
earnings.
Instructions
a. Compute the book value of the ordinary shares at December 31, 2023.
b. Compute the book value of the ordinary shares at December 31, 2023, assuming that the
preference shares have a liquidating value of $106 per share.
Problems
P15.1 (LO 1, 2, 3, 4) 
 (Equity Transactions and Statement Preparation) On January
5, 2022, Phelps Corporation received a charter granting the right to issue 5,000 shares of $100 par
value, 8% cumulative and non-participating preference shares, and 50,000 shares of $10 par value
ordinary shares. It then completed these transactions.
Jan.
11
Issued 20,000 ordinary shares at $16 per share.
Feb.
1
Issued to Sanchez Corp. 4,000 preference shares for the following assets: machinery with a fair
value of $50,000; a factory building with a fair value of $160,000; and land with an appraised
value of $270,000.
July Purchased 1,800 of its own ordinary shares at $17 per share. (Use cost method.)

--- Page 1235 ---
29
Aug.
10
Sold the 1,800 treasury shares at $14 per share.
Dec.
31
Declared a $0.25 per share cash dividend on the ordinary shares and declared the preference
dividend.
Dec.
31
Closed the Income Summary account. There was $175,700 net income.
Instructions
a. Record the journal entries for the transactions listed above.
b. Prepare the equity section of Phelps Corporation’s statement of financial position as of December
31, 2022.
P15.2 (LO 2, 4) (Treasury Share Transactions and Presentation) Clemson SE had the
following equity as of January 1, 2022.
Share capital—ordinary, €5 par value, 20,000 shares issued €100,000
Share premium—ordinary
300,000
Retained earnings
320,000
Total equity
€720,000
During 2022, the following transactions occurred.
Feb. 1
Clemson repurchased 2,000 treasury shares at a price of €19 per share.
Mar. 1
800 shares of treasury shares repurchased above were reissued at €17 per share.
Mar. 18 500 shares of treasury shares repurchased above were reissued at €14 per share.
Apr. 22 600 shares of treasury shares repurchased above were reissued at €20 per share.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record the treasury share transactions in 2022, assuming Clemson
uses the cost method.
b. Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position as of April 30, 2022. Net income
for the first 4 months of 2022 was €130,000.
P15.3 (LO 1, 2, 3, 4) (Equity Transactions and Statement Preparation) Hatch plc has two
classes of share capital outstanding: 8%, £20 par preference and £5 par ordinary. At December 31,
2021, the following accounts were included in equity.
Share Capital—Preference, 150,000 shares £ 3,000,000
Share Capital—Ordinary, 2,000,000 shares 10,000,000
Share Premium—Preference
200,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
27,000,000
Retained Earnings
4,500,000
The following transactions affected equity during 2022.
Jan. 1
30,000 preference shares issued at £22 per share.
Feb. 1
50,000 ordinary shares issued at £20 per share.
June 1
2-for-1 share split on ordinary shares (par value reduced to £2.50).
July 1
30,000 ordinary treasury shares purchased at £10 per share. Hatch uses the cost method.

--- Page 1236 ---
Sept.
15
10,000 treasury shares reissued at £11 per share.
Dec. 31 The preference dividend is declared, and an ordinary dividend of 50 pence per share is
declared.
Dec. 31 Net income is £2,100,000.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position for Hatch plc at December 31, 2022.
Show all supporting computations.
P15.4 (LO 1) (Share Transactions—Lump Sum) Seles SA’s charter authorized issuance of
100,000 ordinary shares of €10 par value and 50,000 shares of €50 preference shares. The following
transactions involving the issuance of shares were completed. Each transaction is independent of the
others.
1. Issued a €10,000, 9% bond payable at par and gave as a bonus one preference share, which at that
time was selling for €106 a share.
2. Issued 500 ordinary shares for machinery. The machinery had been appraised at €7,100; the
seller’s book value was €6,200. The most recent market price of the ordinary shares is €16 a share.
3. Issued 375 ordinary shares and 100 preference shares for a lump sum amounting to €10,800. The
ordinary shares had been selling at €14 and the preference shares at €65.
4. Issued 200 shares of ordinary and 50 shares of preference for furniture and fixtures. The ordinary
shares had a fair value of €16 per share; the furniture and fixtures have a fair value of €6,500.
Instructions
Record the transactions listed above in journal entry form.
P15.5 (LO 2) (Treasury Shares) Before Smith Ltd. engages in the treasury share transactions listed
below, its general ledger reflects, among others, the following account balances (par value is £30 per
share).
Share Premium—Ordinary Share Capital—Ordinary Retained Earnings
£99,000
£270,000
£80,000
Instructions
Record the treasury share transactions (given below) under the cost method of handling treasury
shares: use the FIFO method for purchase-sale purposes.
a. Bought 380 treasury shares at £40 per share.
b. Bought 300 treasury shares at £45 per share.
c. Sold 350 treasury shares at £42 per share.
d. Sold 110 treasury shares at £38 per share.
P15.6 (LO 2, 3, 4) 
 (Treasury Shares—Equity Section Preparation) Washington
Company has the following equity accounts at December 31, 2022.
Share Capital—Ordinary—$100 par value, authorized 8,000 shares $480,000
Retained Earnings
294,000
Instructions
a. Prepare entries in journal form to record the following transactions, which took place during 2023.

--- Page 1237 ---
1. 280 ordinary shares were purchased at $97 per share. (These are to be accounted for using the
cost method.)
2. A $20 per share cash dividend was declared.
3. The dividend declared in No. 2 above was paid.
4. The treasury shares purchased in No. 1 above were resold at $102 per share.
5. 500 shares were purchased at $105 per share.
6. 350 of the shares purchased in No. 5 above were resold at $96 per share.
b. Prepare the equity section of Washington Company’s statement of financial position after giving
effect to these transactions, assuming that the net income for 2023 was $94,000. Country law
requires restriction of retained earnings for the amount of treasury shares.
P15.7 (LO 2, 3) (Cash Dividend Entries) The books of Conchita SA carried the following account
balances as of December 31, 2022.
Cash
R$ 195,000
Share Capital—Preference (6% cumulative, non-participating, R$50 par)
300,000
Share Capital—Ordinary (no-par value, 300,000 shares issued)
1,500,000
Share Premium—Preference
150,000
Treasury Shares (ordinary 2,800 shares at cost)
33,600
Retained Earnings
105,000
The company decided not to pay any dividends in 2022.
The board of directors, at their annual meeting on December 21, 2023, declared the following: “The
current year dividends shall be 6% on the preference and R$0.30 per share on the ordinary. The
dividends in arrears shall be paid by issuing 1,500 treasury shares.” At the date of declaration, the
preference is selling at R$80 per share, and the ordinary at R$12 per share. Net income for 2023 is
estimated at R$77,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries required for the dividend declaration and payment, assuming that they
occur simultaneously.
b. Could Conchita SA give the preference shareholders 2 years’ dividends and ordinary shareholders a
30 cents per share dividend, all in cash?
P15.8 (LO 3) 
 (Dividends and Splits) Myers SpA provides you with the following
condensed statement of financial position information.
Assets
Equity and Liabilities
Equipment (net)
€250,000 Equity
Intangibles
60,000
Share capital—ordinary
(€5 par)
€ 20,000
Investments in ABC shares (Trading)
(10,000 shares)
70,000
Share premium—
ordinary
110,000
Retained earnings
180,000 €310,000
Current assets
40,000
Non-current and current
liabilities
110,000
Total assets
€420,000
Total equity and
liabilities
€420,000

--- Page 1238 ---
Instructions
For each transaction below, indicate the euro impact (if any) on the following five items: (1) total
assets, (2) share capital—ordinary, (3) share premium—ordinary, (4) retained earnings, and (5) equity.
(Each situation is independent.)
a. Myers declares and pays a €1 per share cash dividend.
b. Myers declares and issues a 10% share dividend when the market price is €14 per share.
c. Myers declares and issues a 100% share dividend when the market price is €15 per share.
d. Myers declares and distributes a property dividend. Myers gives one ABC share for every two
shares held of Myers SpA. ABC is selling for €10 per share on the date the property dividend is
declared.
e. Myers declares a 2-for-1 share split and issues new shares.
P15.9 (LO 1, 2, 3, 4) (Equity Section of Statement of Financial Position) The following is a
summary of all relevant transactions of Vicario Corporation since it was organized in 2022.
In 2022, 15,000 shares were authorized and 7,000 ordinary shares ($50 par value) were issued at a
price of $57. In 2023, 1,000 shares were issued as a share dividend when a share was selling for $60.
Three hundred ordinary shares were bought in 2024 at a cost of $64 per share. These 300 shares are
still in the company treasury.
In 2023, 10,000 preference shares were authorized and the company issued 5,000 of them ($100 par
value) at $113. Some of the preference shares were reacquired by the company and later reissued for
$4,700 more than it cost the company.
The corporation has earned a total of $610,000 in net income and paid out a total of $312,600 in cash
dividends since incorporation.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position in proper form for Vicario Corporation
as of December 31, 2024. Account for treasury shares using the cost method.
P15.10 (LO 3) 
 (Share Dividends and Share Split) Ortago S.A.’s €10 par ordinary shares
are selling for €110 per share. Four million shares are currently issued and outstanding. The board of
directors wants to stimulate interest in Ortago S.A. ordinary shares before a forthcoming share issue
but does not wish to distribute cash at this time. The board also believes that too many adjustments to
the equity section, especially retained earnings, might discourage potential investors.
The board has considered three options for stimulating interest in the shares:
1. A 20% share dividend.
2. A 100% share dividend.
3. A 2-for-1 share split.
Instructions
Acting as financial advisor to the board, you have been asked to report briefly on each option and,
considering the board’s wishes, make a recommendation. Discuss the effects of each of the foregoing
options.
P15.11 (LO 3, 4) (Share and Cash Dividends) Earnhart Corporation has outstanding 3,000,000
ordinary shares with a par value of $10 each. The balance in its retained earnings account at January 1,
2022, was $24,000,000, and it then had Share Premium of $5,000,000. During 2022, the company’s
net income was $4,700,000. A cash dividend of $0.60 per share was declared on May 5, 2022, and was
paid June 30, 2022, and a 6% share dividend was declared on November 30, 2022, and distributed to

--- Page 1239 ---
shareholders of record at the close of business on December 31, 2022. You have been asked to advise
on the proper accounting treatment of the share dividend.
The existing shares of the company are quoted on a national securities exchange. The market price of
the shares has been as follows.
October 31, 2022
$31
November 30, 2022 $34
December 31, 2022 $38
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry to record the declaration and payment of the cash dividend.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record the declaration and distribution of the share dividend.
c. Prepare the equity section (including schedules of retained earnings and share premium) of the
statement of financial position of Earnhart Corporation for the year 2022 on the basis of the
foregoing information. Draft a note to the financial statements setting forth the basis of the
accounting for the share dividend, and add separately appropriate comments or explanations
regarding the basis chosen.
P15.12 (LO 1, 2, 3, 4) (Analysis and Classification of Equity Transactions) Penzi plc was
formed on July 1, 2020. It was authorized to issue 300,000 shares of £10 par value ordinary shares and
100,000 shares of 8% £25 par value, cumulative and non-participating preference shares. Penzi plc has
a July 1–June 30 fiscal year.
The following information relates to the equity accounts of Penzi plc.
Ordinary Shares
Prior to the 2022–2023 fiscal year, Penzi plc had 110,000 ordinary shares outstanding issued as
follows.
1. 85,000 shares were issued for cash on July 1, 2020, at £31 per share.
2. On July 24, 2020, 5,000 shares were exchanged for a plot of land which cost the seller £70,000 in
2014 and had an estimated fair value of £220,000 on July 24, 2020.
3. 20,000 shares were issued on March 1, 2021, for £42 per share.
During the 2022–2023 fiscal year, the following transactions regarding ordinary shares took place.
November
30, 2022
Penzi purchased 2,000 of its own shares on the open market at £39 per share. Penzi uses
the cost method for treasury shares.
December
15, 2022
Penzi declared a 5% share dividend for ordinary shareholders of record on January 15,
2023, to be issued on January 31, 2023. Penzi was having a liquidity problem and could not
afford a cash dividend at the time. Penzi’s ordinary shares were selling at £52 per share on
December 15, 2022.
June 20,
2023
Penzi sold 500 of its own ordinary shares that it had purchased for £21,000 on November
30, 2022.
Preference Shares
Penzi issued 40,000 preference shares at £44 per share on July 1, 2021.
Cash Dividends
Penzi has followed a schedule of declaring cash dividends in December and June, with payment being
made to shareholders of record in the following month. The cash dividends which have been declared
since inception of the company through June 30, 2023, are shown below.

--- Page 1240 ---
Declaration Date Ordinary Shares Preference Shares
12/15/21 £0.30 per share
£1.00 per share
6/15/22 £0.30 per share
£1.00 per share
12/15/22
—
£1.00 per share
No cash dividends were declared during June 2023 due to the company’s liquidity problems.
Retained Earnings
As of June 30, 2022, Penzi’s retained earnings account had a balance of £690,000. For the fiscal year
ending June 30, 2023, Penzi reported net income of £40,000.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position, including appropriate notes, for Penzi
plc as of June 30, 2023, as it should appear in its annual report to the shareholders.
Concepts for Analysis
CA15.1 (LO 1) (Preemptive Rights and Dilution of Ownership) Wallace Computer is a small,
closely held company. Derek Wallace, the president, holds 80% of the shares. Of the remainder, 10%
are held by members of his family and 10% by Kathy Baker, a former officer who is now retired. The
statement of financial position of the company at June 30, 2022, was substantially as shown here.
Assets
Equity and Liabilities
Cash
£ 22,000 Share capital—ordinary £250,000
Other
450,000 Retained earnings
172,000
£472,000 Current liabilities
50,000
£472,000
Additional authorized ordinary shares of £300,000 par value have never been issued. To strengthen the
cash position of the company, Wallace issued ordinary shares with a par value of £100,000 to himself
at par for cash. At the next shareholders’ meeting, Baker objected and claimed that her interests had
been injured.
Instructions
a. Which shareholder’s right was ignored in the issue of shares to Derek Wallace?
b. How might the damage to Baker’s interests be repaired most simply?
c. If Derek Wallace offered Baker a personal cash settlement and they agreed to employ you as an
impartial arbitrator to determine the amount, what settlement would you propose? Present your
calculations with sufficient explanation to satisfy both parties.
CA15.2 (LO 1) (Issuance of Shares for Land) Martin Corporation is planning to issue 3,000
shares of its own $10 par value ordinary shares for two acres of land to be used as a building site.
Instructions
a. What general rule should be applied to determine the amount at which the land should be
recorded?
b. Under what circumstances should this transaction be recorded at the fair value of the land?
c. Under what circumstances should this transaction be recorded at the fair value of the shares
issued?
d. Assume Martin intentionally records this transaction at an amount greater than the fair value of
the land and the shares. Discuss this situation.

--- Page 1241 ---
CA15.3 (LO 1, 2, 3) 
 (Conceptual Issues—Equity) The IASB has set forth the Conceptual
Framework that it will use in developing standards. As part of this Conceptual Framework, the IASB
defines various elements of financial statements.
Instructions
Answer the following questions based on the Conceptual Framework.
a. Define and discuss the term “equity.”
b. What transactions or events change equity?
c. What financial statement element other than equity is typically affected by owner investments?
d. What financial statement element other than equity is typically affected by distributions to
owners?
e. What are examples of changes within equity that do not change the total amount of equity?
CA15.4 (LO 3) (Share Dividends and Splits) The directors of Merchant ASA are considering the
issuance of a share dividend. They have asked you to discuss the proposed action by answering the
following questions.
Instructions
a. What is a share dividend? How is a share dividend distinguished from a share split (1) from a legal
standpoint, and (2) from an accounting standpoint?
b. For what reasons does a company usually declare a share dividend? A share split?
c. Discuss the amount, if any, of retained earnings to be capitalized in connection with a share
dividend.
CA15.5 (LO 3) (Share Dividends) Yamada Inc., a client, is considering the authorization of a 10%
ordinary share dividend. The financial vice president of Yamada wishes to discuss the accounting
implications of such an authorization with you before the next meeting of the board of directors.
Instructions
a. The first topic the vice president wishes to discuss is the nature of the share dividend to the
recipient. Discuss the case against considering the share dividend as income to the recipient.
b. The other topic for discussion is the propriety of issuing the share dividend to all “shareholders of
record” or to “shareholders of record exclusive of shares held in the name of the corporation as
treasury shares.” Discuss the case against issuing share dividends on treasury shares.
CA15.6 (LO 2, 3) (Share Dividend, Cash Dividend, and Treasury Shares) Mask SE has 30,000
shares of €10 par value ordinary shares authorized and 20,000 shares issued and outstanding. On
August 15, 2022, Mask purchased 1,000 shares of treasury shares for €18 per share. Mask uses the cost
method to account for treasury shares. On September 14, 2022, Mask sold 500 shares of the treasury
shares for €20 per share.
In October 2022, Mask declared and distributed 1,950 shares as a share dividend from unissued shares
when the market price of the ordinary shares was €21 per share.
On December 20, 2022, Mask declared a €1 per share cash dividend, payable on January 10, 2023, to
shareholders of record on December 31, 2022.
Instructions
a. How should Mask account for the purchase and sale of the treasury shares, and how should the
treasury shares be presented in the statement of financial position at December 31, 2022?

--- Page 1242 ---
b. How should Mask account for the share dividend, and how would it affect equity at December 31,
2022? Why?
c. How should Mask account for the cash dividend, and how would it affect the statement of
financial position at December 31, 2022? Why?
CA15.7 (LO 2) 
 (Treasury Shares) Lois Kenseth, president of Sycamore Corporation, is
concerned about several large shareholders who have been very vocal lately in their criticisms of her
leadership. She thinks they might mount a campaign to have her removed as the corporation’s CEO.
She decides that buying them out by purchasing their shares could eliminate them as opponents, and
she is confident they would accept a “good” offer. Kenseth knows the corporation’s cash position is
decent, so it has the cash to complete the transaction. She also knows the purchase of these shares will
increase earnings per share, which should make other investors quite happy. (Earnings per share is
calculated by dividing net income available for the ordinary shareholders by the weighted-average
number of shares outstanding. Therefore, if the number of shares outstanding is decreased by
purchasing treasury shares, earnings per share increases.)
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. Who are the stakeholders in this situation?
b. What are the ethical issues involved?
c. Should Kenseth authorize the transaction?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s complete annual
report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following questions.
a. What is the par or stated value of M&S’s preference shares?
b. What is the par or stated value of M&S’s ordinary shares?
c. What percentage of M&S’s authorized ordinary shares was issued at year-end 2019?
d. How many ordinary shares were outstanding at year-end 2018 and 2019?
e. What was the pound amount effect of the cash dividends on M&S’s equity?
f. What is M&S’s return on ordinary share equity for 2019 and 2018?
g. What is M&S’s payout ratio for 2019 and 2018?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B and C,
respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.

--- Page 1243 ---
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial statements to answer the following questions.
a. What is the par or stated value of adidas’s and Puma’s ordinary shares?
b. How many shares were issued by adidas and Puma at December 31, 2018?
c. How many shares are held as treasury shares by adidas by Puma at December 31, 2018?
d. How many adidas ordinary shares and how many Puma ordinary shares are outstanding at
December 31, 2018?
e. What amounts of cash dividends per share were declared by adidas and Puma in 2018? What were
the monetary amount effects of the cash dividends on each company’s equity?
f. What are adidas’s and Puma’s return on equity for 2018 and 2017? Which company gets the higher
return on the equity of its shareholders?
g. What are adidas’s and Puma’s payout ratios for 2018?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1: BHP (formerly BHP Billiton)
BHP (formerly BHP Billiton) (AUS) is the world’s largest diversified natural resources company. The
company extracts and processes minerals, oil, and gas from its production operations located primarily
in Australia, the Americas, and southern Africa. BHP Billiton sells its products globally, with sales and
marketing taking place through its principal hubs of The Hague and Singapore. Presented below are
some basic facts for BHP.
BHP
(in thousands)
Current Year Prior Year
Sales
$ 65,986
$ 72,226
Net earnings
11,075
15,532
Total assets
138,109
129,273
Total liabilities
66,074
62,188
Share capital
2,255
2,255
Reserves
1,970
1,912
Retained earnings
66,979
62,236
Treasury shares
(540)
(533)
Number of shares outstanding (millions)
5,322
5,323
Instructions
a. What are some of the reasons that management purchases its own shares?
b. Explain how earnings per share might be affected by treasury share transactions.
c. Calculate the ratio of debt to assets for the current and prior years, and discuss the implications of
the change.
Case 2: Jinpain International Ltd.
The following note related to equity was reported in Jinpain International’s (CHN) annual report.

--- Page 1244 ---
On February 1, the Board of Directors declared a 2-for-1 share split, distributed on February 25 to
shareholders of record on February 10. Accordingly, all numbers of common (ordinary) shares,
except unissued shares and treasury shares, and all per share data have been restated to reflect
this share split.
Instructions
a. What is the significance of the date of record and the date of distribution?
b. Why might Jinpain have declared a 2-for-1 for share split?
c. What impact does Jinpain’s share split have on (1) total equity, (2) total par value, (3) outstanding
shares, and (4) book value per share?
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
On January 1, 2022, Nadal SE had the following equity accounts.
Share Capital—Ordinary (€10 par value, 60,000 shares issued and outstanding) €600,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
500,000
Retained Earnings
620,000
During 2022, the following transactions occurred.
Jan. 15 Declared and paid a €1.05 cash dividend per share to shareholders.
Apr. 15 Declared and issued a 10% share dividend. The market price of the shares was €14 per share.
May 15 Reacquired 2,000 ordinary shares at a market price of €15 per share.
Nov. 15 Reissued 1,000 shares held in treasury at a price of €18 per share.
Dec. 31 Determined that net income for the year was €370,000.
Accounting
Journalize the above transactions. (Include entries to close net income to Retained Earnings.)
Determine the ending balances to be reported for Share Capital—Ordinary, Retained Earnings, and
Equity.
Analysis
Calculate the payout ratio and the return on equity ratio.
Principles
The Federer Group is examining Nadal’s financial statements and wonders whether the “gains” or
“losses” on Nadal’s treasury share transactions should be included in income for the year. Briefly
explain whether, and the conceptual reasons why, gains or losses on treasury share transactions should
be recorded in income.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting, “Chapter 4, The Framework (1989): The
Remaining Text” (London, U.K.: IASB, September 2010), par. 4.20.
[2] International Financial Reporting Standard 2, Share-Based Payment (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2004), par. 10.

--- Page 1245 ---
[3] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), paras. 18–20.
[4] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), par. 79.
[5] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003), paras. 106–107.
Research Case
Recall from Chapter 13 that Hincapie Co. (a specialty bike-accessory manufacturer) is expecting growth
in sales of some products targeted to the low-price market. Hincapie is contemplating a preference
share issue to help finance this expansion in operations. The company is leaning toward preference
shares because ownership will not be diluted, but the investors will get an extra dividend if the
company does well. The company management wants to be certain that its reporting of this transaction
is transparent to its current shareholders and wants you to research the disclosure requirements
related to its capital structure.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS access at
this site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet
browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the authoritative literature that addresses disclosure of information about capital
structure.
b. What information about share capital must companies disclose? Discuss how Hincapie should
report the proposed preference share issue.
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the accounting procedures for equity under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
The accounting for transactions related to equity, such as issuance of shares, purchase of treasury
shares, and declaration and payment of dividends, is similar under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. Major
differences relate to terminology used and presentation of equity information.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to equity.
Similarities
The accounting for the issuance of shares and purchase of treasury shares is similar under both
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
The accounting for declaration and payment of dividends and the accounting for share splits is
similar under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Differences
U.S. GAAP requires that small share dividends (referred to as stock dividends) be recorded by
transferring an amount equal to the fair value of the shares issued from retained earnings to share
capital accounts. IFRS is silent on the accounting for share dividends.

--- Page 1246 ---
Major differences relate to terminology used, introduction of concepts such as revaluation surplus,
and presentation of equity information.
In the United States and the United Kingdom, many companies rely on substantial investments
from private investors. Other countries have different investor groups. For example, in Germany,
financial institutions such as banks are not only the major creditors but often are also the largest
shareholders as well.
The accounting for treasury share retirements differs between U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Under U.S.
GAAP, a company has three options: (1) charge the excess of the cost of treasury shares over par
value to retained earnings, (2) allocate the difference between paid-in capital and retained
earnings, or (3) charge the entire amount to paid-in capital. Under IFRS, the excess may have to be
charged to paid-in capital, depending on the original transaction related to the issuance of the
shares.
The statement of changes in equity is usually referred to as the statement of stockholders’ equity
(or shareholders’ equity) under U.S. GAAP.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS use the term retained earnings. However, U.S. GAAP uses the account
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss). Use of this account is gaining prominence
within the IFRS literature, which traditionally has relied on the term “reserve” as a dumping
ground for other types of equity transactions, such as other comprehensive income items, as well
as various types of unusual transactions related to convertible debt and share option contracts.
The term surplus is generally not used in U.S. GAAP, as the standards do not allow revaluation
accounting. Under IFRS, it is common to report “revaluation surplus” related to increases or
decreases in items such as property, plant, and equipment; mineral resources; and some intangible
assets.
About the Numbers
As indicated, numerous differences in terminology exist in comparing equity under U.S. GAAP and
IFRS. The following excerpt from a U.S. statement of financial position (balance sheet) illustrates these
distinctions (you might compare the presentation here to that in Illustration 15.16 under IFRS).
Frost Company
Stockholders’ Equity
December 31, 2022
Capital stock
Preferred stock, $100 par value, 7% cumulative, 100,000 shares authorized,
30,000 shares issued and outstanding
$ 3,000,000
Common stock, no par, stated value $10 per share, 500,000 shares
authorized, 400,000 shares issued
4,000,000
Common stock dividend distributable, 20,000 shares
200,000
Total capital stock
7,200,000
Additional paid-in capital
Excess over par—preferred
$150,000
Excess over stated value—common
840,000
990,000
Total paid-in capital
8,190,000
Retained earnings
4,360,000
Total paid-in capital and retained earnings
12,550,000
Less: cost of treasury stock (2,000 shares, common)
190,000
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
360,000

--- Page 1247 ---
Frost Company
Stockholders’ Equity
December 31, 2022
Total stockholders’ equity
$12,000,000
On the Horizon
As indicated earlier in the text, the IASB and the FASB have completed some work on a project related
to financial statement presentation. An important part of this study is to determine whether certain
line items, subtotals, and totals should be clearly defined, and whether they should be included in the
financial statements. For example, it is likely that the statement of changes in equity and its
presentation will be examined closely. In addition, the options of how to present other comprehensive
income under U.S. GAAP will change in any converged standard.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following does not represent a pair of U.S. GAAP/IFRS–comparable terms?
a. Treasury stock/Repurchase reserve.
b. Additional paid-in capital/Share premium.
c. Common stock/Share capital—ordinary.
d. Preferred stock/Preference share.
2. Under U.S. GAAP, the amount of capital received in excess of par value would be credited to:
a. Retained Earnings.
b. Contributed Capital.
c. Share Premium.
d. Par value is not used under U.S. GAAP.
3. The term “reserves” is used under U.S. GAAP with reference to all of the following except.
a. gains and losses on revaluation of property, plant, and equipment.
b. capital received in excess of the par value of issued shares.
c. retained earnings.
d. U.S. GAAP does not use the term reserves.
4. Which of the following is false?
a. Under U.S. GAAP, companies cannot record gains on transactions involving their own shares.
b. Under U.S. GAAP, companies do not make an entry for a share split.
c. Under U.S. GAAP, the statement of stockholders’ equity is a required statement.
d. Under U.S. GAAP, a company records a revaluation surplus when it experiences an increase in the
price of its common stock.
5. Under U.S. GAAP, a purchase by a company of its own shares results in.
a. an increase in treasury shares.
b. a decrease in assets.

--- Page 1248 ---
c. a decrease in equity.
d. All of the answer choices are correct.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP15.1 Mary Tokar is comparing a U.S. GAAP-based company to a company that uses IFRS. Both
companies report investments, with unrealized gains and losses not reported in income. The IFRS
company reports unrealized losses on these investments under the heading “Reserves” in its equity
section. However, Mary cannot find a similar heading in the U.S. GAAP company financial statements.
Can Mary conclude that the U.S. GAAP company has no unrealized gains or losses on its investments?
Explain.
GAAP15.2 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with
respect to the accounting for equity.
GAAP15.3 Briefly discuss the implications of the financial statement presentation project for the
reporting of equity.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. a 2. b 3. d 4. d 5. d
Notes
1 This privilege is referred to as a share right or warrant. The warrants issued in these situations are
of short duration, unlike the warrants issued with other securities.
2 Companies rarely, if ever, issue shares at a value below par value. The reason: The corporation may
call on the original purchaser or the current holder of the shares issued below par to pay in the
amount of the discount to prevent creditors from sustaining a loss upon liquidation of the
corporation.
3 The possible justification for classifying these shares as assets is that the company will use them to
liquidate a specific liability that appears on the statement of financial position.
4 If making numerous acquisitions of blocks of treasury shares at different prices, a company may use
inventory cost flow assumptions—such as specific identification, average-cost, or FIFO—to identify
the cost at date of reissuance.
5 One recent study of large international companies showed that in the decade ending in March 2013,
companies with the highest dividend payouts showed the highest share price increases. See “Rising
Corporate Cash: What It Means for Investors,” T. Rowe Price Report (Summer 2013) and G.
Zuckerman and A. Kuriloff, “High-Dividend Stocks Gain Appeal,” Wall Street Journal (February 28,
2016).
6 If the corporation buys its own outstanding shares, it reduces its contributed capital and distributes
assets to shareholders. If permitted, the corporation could, by purchasing treasury shares at any
price desired, return to the shareholders their investments and leave creditors with little or no
protection against loss.
7 Theoretically, the ex-dividend date is the day after the date of record. However, to allow time for
transfer of the shares, the securities exchanges generally advance the ex-dividend date two to four
days. Therefore, the party who owns the shares on the day prior to the expressed ex-dividend date
receives the dividends. The party who buys the shares on and after the ex-dividend date does not
receive the dividend. Between the declaration date and the ex-dividend date, the market price of the
shares includes the dividend.
8 An alternative approach (required in the United States) is the fair value approach. Under this
approach, for small share dividends (defined as those less than 20–25%) companies transfer the fair

--- Page 1249 ---
value of the shares issued from retained earnings. This approach was adopted, at least in part, to
influence the share dividend policies of corporations—some of which were possibly misleading
investors as to the real impact of the share dividend. That is, some argued that “many recipients of
share dividends look upon them as distributions of corporate earnings and usually in an amount
equivalent to the fair value of the additional shares received.” (See Stephen A. Zeff, “The Rise of
‘Economic Consequences,’” The Journal of Accountancy (December 1978), pp. 53–66 for a complete
discussion of the evolution of this issue.) IFRS is silent on the accounting for share dividends under
either the par value or fair value method. We show the par value method because it is more
conceptually sound, as it is generally accepted that share dividends are not income for investors.
9 Looking at Illustration 15.16, note that companies may include a number of items in “Accumulated
other comprehensive loss” or “Accumulated other comprehensive income.” Among these items are
“Foreign currency translation adjustments” (covered in advanced accounting), “Unrealized holding
gains and losses for non-trading equity investments” (covered in Chapter 17), and “Unrealized
holding gains or losses on property, plant, and equipment” (covered in Chapter 11), often referred to
as revaluation surplus.
10 Andrew Blackman, “How Well Do You Know … Dividends?” Wall Street Journal (September 10,
2007), p. R5. Also, see payout data at
pages.stern.nyu.edu/~%20adamodar/New_Home_Page/data.html and M. Bird, “Dividend Frenzy
Starts to Cool Down,” Wall Street Journal (November 2, 2016).
11 When preference shares are participating, there may be different agreements as to how the
participation feature is to be executed. However, in the absence of any specific agreement the
following procedure is recommended:
a. After the preference shares are assigned the current year’s dividend, the ordinary shares will
receive a “like” percentage of par value outstanding. In example (3), this amounts to 6 percent
of €400,000.
b. In example (3), shown in Illustration 15A.3, the remainder of the declared dividend is €20,000.
We divide this amount by total par value (€500,000) to find the rate of participation to be
applied to each class of shares. In this case, the rate of participation is 4% (€20,000 ÷
€500,000), which we then multiply by the par value of each class of shares to determine the
amount of participation.
Sources: Ernst and Young, Global IPO Trends Report (Fourth Quarter, 2019); and L. Ventura, “World’s Largest Companies 2019,”
Global Finance (August 29, 2019).

--- Page 1250 ---
