CHAPTER 18
Revenue Recognition
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Understand the fundamental concepts related to revenue recognition
and measurement.
2. Understand and apply the five-step revenue recognition process.
3. Apply the five-step process to major revenue recognition issues.
4. Describe presentation and disclosure regarding revenue.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that
are integral to the topics presented here. Because of the converged
IASB/FASB standard on revenue recognition, there is no Global
Accounting Insights in this chapter.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 18
As indicated in the following opening story, the issue of when revenue should
be recognized is complex. The many methods of marketing products and
services make it difficult to develop guidelines that will apply to all
situations. This chapter provides you with general guidelines used in most
business transactions. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.

--- Page 1521 ---
It’s Back
Revenue recognition practices are the most prevalent reasons for accounting
restatements. A number of the revenue recognition issues relate to possible
fraudulent behavior by company executives and employees. Consider the
following situations.
Rolls-Royce (GBR) was questioned by investors about the revenue
recognition practices for its “Totalcare” contracts, where engines are sold at
little or no profit but tie the customer into long-term servicing and parts
purchases. When it was revealed that market regulators were exploring these
revenue practices and changes in how Rolls booked fees from its risk-sharing
partnerships, the company’s share price slipped to a one-year low.
The former co-chairman and CEO of Qwest Communications
International Inc. (USA) and eight other former Qwest officers and
employees were charged with fraud and other violations of U.S. securities
laws. Three of these people fraudulently characterized non-recurring revenue
from one-time sales as revenue from recurring data and Internet services.
Internal correspondence likened Qwest’s dependence on these transactions
to fill the gap between actual and projected revenue to an addiction.
Sinovel Wind Group (CHN) was scrutinized by Chinese regulators over
accounting problems related to its turbine business. The accounting
irregularities led to an overstatement of revenue by 10 percent and profits by
20 percent in its first year as a public company. Sinovel attributed the error
to incorrectly recognizing revenue for uncompleted projects. Following the
investigation, Sinovel’s founder resigned as chairman but remained on the
board of directors.
Though the cases cited involved fraud and irregularity, not all revenue
recognition errors are intentional. For example, Turquoise Hill Resources
(CAN) restated its financial results for three years due to revenue recognition
irregularities. The restatement corrected errors in the accounting treatment for
sales contracts, which provide for transfer of title—and revenue recognition—
upon loading the coal onto customers’ trucks. It was determined that, due to the
changing nature of the contracts, revenue should not be recognized until
customers pay.
One of the most significant challenges related to revenue recognition is the
amount of judgment that is involved in deciding how to report revenue
transactions. Since 2016, the auditors of public companies in the European
Economic Area have been required to report the areas they considered to be “key
audit matters” (KAMs). As the term implies, these are the areas of the audit that
were of the most significance, and for which significant auditor judgment is

--- Page 1522 ---
required. Unsurprisingly, revenue and other income has been one of the most
frequently noted matters. To date, this item has been the second most frequently
reported, representing almost 18 percent of the KAMs. The only matters more
frequently reported are related to asset impairments.
Revenue numbers are also attracting more attention from investors these days. A
concern expressed recently is that revenue growth is not robust, and increases in
net income (the bottom line) are caused by factors such as low financing costs
and lower labor costs, which in the long run may not be sustainable. So more
focus is now being given to a company’s top-line revenue number, as many
believe strong revenue growth suggests a more profitable company in the future.
Companies have recently implemented the substantially revised standard on
revenue recognition that hopefully will improve the reporting of revenue
transactions. This standard provides a set of guidelines to follow in determining
when revenue should be reported and how it should be measured. The standard
is comprehensive and applies to all companies. As a result, comparability and
consistency in reporting revenue should be enhanced. After studying this chapter,
you should have a good understanding of these revenue recognition concepts.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a
targeted summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-
choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and
practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Fundamentals of Revenue Recognition
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Understand the fundamental concepts related to revenue recognition and
measurement.
Background
Revenue is one of the most important measures of financial performance that a
company reports. Revenue provides insights into a company’s past and future
performance and is a significant driver of other performance measures, such as
EBITDA, net income, and earnings per share. Therefore, establishing robust
guidelines for recognizing revenue is a standard-setting priority.

--- Page 1523 ---
Most revenue transactions pose few problems for revenue recognition. That is,
most companies initiate and complete transactions at the same time. However,
not all transactions are that simple. For example, consider a cell phone contract
between a company such as Vodaphone (GBR) and a customer. Vodaphone
often provides a customer with a package that may include a handset, free
minutes of talk time, data downloads, and text messaging service. In addition,
some providers will bundle that with a fixed-line broadband service. At the same
time, the customer may pay for these services in a variety of ways, possibly
receiving a discount on the handset and then paying higher prices for connection
fees and so forth. In some cases, depending on the package purchased, the
company may provide free upgrades in subsequent periods. How, then, should
Vodaphone report the various pieces of this sale? The answer is not obvious.
Both the IASB and the FASB have indicated that the state of reporting for revenue
was unsatisfactory. IFRS was criticized because it lacked guidance in a number of
areas. For example, IFRS had one general standard on revenue recognition—IAS
18—plus some limited guidance related to certain minor topics. In contrast, U.S.
GAAP had numerous standards related to revenue recognition (by some counts,
well over 100), but many believed the standards were often inconsistent with one
another. Thus, the accounting for revenue provided a most fitting contrast of the
principles-based (IFRS) and rules-based (U.S. GAAP) approaches.1
In 2014, the IASB issued a converged standard on revenue recognition entitled
Revenue from Contracts with Customers. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature
References section near the end of the chapter.) To address the inconsistencies
and weaknesses of the previous approaches, a comprehensive revenue
recognition standard now applies to a wide range of transactions and industries.
The Boards believe this standard will improve IFRS and U.S. GAAP by:
a. Providing a more robust framework for addressing revenue recognition
issues.
b. Improving comparability of revenue recognition practices across entities,
industries, jurisdictions, and capital markets.
c. Simplifying the preparation of financial statements by reducing the number
of requirements to which companies must refer.
d. Requiring enhanced disclosures to help financial statement users better
understand the amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue that is
recognized. [2]
Revenue Recognition Standard
The recent revenue recognition standard, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers, adopts an asset-liability approach as the basis for revenue

--- Page 1524 ---
recognition. The asset-liability approach recognizes and measures revenue based
on changes in assets and liabilities. The Boards decided that focusing on (a) the
recognition and measurement of assets and liabilities and (b) changes in those
assets or liabilities over the life of the contract brings more discipline to the
measurement of revenue, compared to the “risks and rewards” criteria in prior
standards.
Under the asset-liability approach, companies account for revenue based on the
asset or liability arising from contracts with customers (see Underlying
Concepts). Companies analyze contracts with customers because contracts
initiate revenue transactions. Contracts indicate the terms of the transaction,
provide the measurement of the consideration, and specify the promises that
must be met by each party.
Underlying Concepts
The asset-liability approach is consistent with the conceptual framework
approach to recognition.
Illustration 18.1 shows the key concepts related to the standard on revenue
recognition.
ILLUSTRATION 18.1 Key Concepts of Revenue Recognition
The standard first identifies the key objective of revenue recognition, which is
followed by a five-step process that companies should use to ensure that revenue
is measured and reported correctly.
The culmination of the process is the revenue recognition principle, which
states that revenue is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied.

--- Page 1525 ---
We examine all steps in more detail in the following section.
Overview of the Five-Step Process—Airbus Example
Assume that Airbus (FRA) signs a contract to sell airplanes to Cathay Pacific
Airlines (HKG) for €100 million. Illustration 18.2 shows the five steps that
Airbus follows to recognize revenue.
As indicated, Step 5 is when Airbus recognizes revenue related to the sale of the
airplanes to Cathay Pacific. At this point, Airbus delivers the airplanes to Cathay
Pacific and satisfies its performance obligation. In essence, a change in control
from Airbus to Cathay Pacific occurs. Cathay Pacific now controls the assets
because it has the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all the
remaining benefits from the airplanes. Control also includes Cathay Pacific’s
ability to prevent other companies from directing the use of, or receiving the
benefits from, the airplanes.

--- Page 1526 ---
ILLUSTRATION 18.2 Five Steps of Revenue Recognition
Extended Example of the Five-Step Process: BEAN
To provide another application of the basic principles of the five-step revenue
recognition model, we use a coffee and wine business called BEAN. BEAN serves
gourmet coffee, espresso, lattes, teas, and smoothies. It also sells various
pastries, coffee beans, other food products, wine, and beer.
Identifying the Contract with Customers—Step 1

--- Page 1527 ---
Assume that Tyler Angler orders a large cup of black coffee costing $3 from
BEAN. Tyler gives $3 to a BEAN barista, who pours the coffee into a large cup and
gives it to Tyler.
Question: How much revenue should BEAN recognize on this
transaction?
Step 1 We first must determine whether a valid contract exists between BEAN
and Tyler. Here are the components of a valid contract and how it affects BEAN
and Tyler.
1. The contract has commercial substance: Tyler gives cash for the
coffee.
2. The parties have approved the contract: Tyler agrees to purchase the
coffee and BEAN agrees to sell it.
3. Identification of the rights of the parties is established: Tyler has
the right to the coffee and BEAN has the right to receive $3.
4. Payment terms are identified: Tyler agrees to pay $3 for the coffee.
5. It is probable that the consideration will be collected: BEAN
receives $3 before it delivers the coffee. [3]2
From this information, it appears that BEAN and Tyler have a valid contract with
one another.
Step 2  The next step is to identify BEAN’s performance obligation(s), if any. The
answer is straightforward—BEAN has a performance obligation to provide a large
cup of coffee to Tyler. BEAN has no other performance obligation for any other
good or service.
Step 3 BEAN must determine the transaction price related to the sale of the
coffee. The price of the coffee is $3, and no discounts or other adjustments are
available. Therefore, the transaction price is $3.
Step 4  BEAN must allocate the transaction price to all performance obligations.
Given that BEAN has only one performance obligation, no allocation is necessary.
Step 5  Revenue is recognized when the performance obligation is satisfied.
BEAN satisfies its performance obligation when Tyler obtains control of the
coffee. The following conditions are indicators that control of the coffee has
passed to Tyler:
a. BEAN has the right to payment for the coffee.

--- Page 1528 ---
b. BEAN has transferred legal title to the coffee.
c. BEAN has transferred physical possession of the coffee.
d. Tyler has significant risks (e.g., he might spill the coffee) and rewards of
ownership (he gets to drink the coffee).
e. Tyler has accepted the asset.
Solution: BEAN should recognize $3 in revenue from this transaction when
Tyler receives the coffee.
Identifying Separate Performance Obligations—Step 2
The following day, Tyler orders another large cup of coffee for $3 and also
purchases two bagels at a price of $5. The barista provides these products and
Tyler pays $8.
Question: How much revenue should BEAN recognize on the purchase
of these two items?
Step 1  A valid contract exists as it meets the five conditions necessary for a
contract to be enforceable as discussed in the previous example.
Step 2 BEAN must determine whether the sale of the coffee and the sale of the
two bagels involve one or two performance obligations. In the previous
transaction between BEAN and Tyler, this determination was straightforward
because BEAN provided a single distinct product (a large cup of coffee), and
therefore only one performance obligation existed. However, an arrangement to
purchase coffee and bagels may have more than one performance obligation.
Multiple performance obligations exist when the following two conditions are
satisfied:
1. BEAN must provide a distinct product or service. In other words, BEAN
must be able to sell the coffee and the bagels separately from one another.
2. BEAN’s products are distinct within the contract. In other words, if the
performance obligation is not highly dependent on, or interrelated with,
other promises in the contract, then each performance obligation should be
accounted for separately. Conversely, if each of these products is
interdependent and interrelated, these products are combined and reported
as one performance obligation. [4]
The large cup of coffee and the two bagels appear to be distinct from one another
and are not highly dependent or interrelated. That is, BEAN can sell the coffee

--- Page 1529 ---
and the two bagels separately, and Tyler benefits separately from the coffee and
the bagels.
BEAN has two performance obligations—one for the sale of the coffee and one
for the sale of the bagels.
Step 3 The transaction price is $8 ($3 + $5).
Step 4  BEAN has two performance obligations: to provide (1) a large cup of
coffee and (2) the two bagels. Each of these obligations is distinct and not
interrelated (and priced separately); no allocation of the transaction price is
necessary. That is, the coffee sale is recorded at $3 and the sale of the bagels is
priced at $5.
Step 5  BEAN has satisfied both performance obligations when the coffee and
bagels are given to Tyler (control of the product has passed to the customer).
Solution: BEAN should recognize $8 ($3 + $5) of revenue when Tyler receives
the coffee and bagels.
Determining the Transaction Price—Step 3
BEAN decides to provide an additional incentive to its customers to shop at its
store. BEAN roasts its own coffee beans and sells the beans wholesale to grocery
stores, restaurants, and other commercial companies. In addition, it sells the
coffee beans at its retail location. BEAN is interested in stimulating sales of its
Smoke Jumper coffee beans on Tuesdays, a slow business day for the store.
Normally, these beans sell for $10 for a 12-ounce bag, but BEAN decides to cut
the price by $1 when customers buy them on Tuesdays (the discounted price is
now $9 per bag). Tyler has come to the store on a Tuesday, decides to purchase a
bag of Smoke Jumper beans, and pays BEAN $9.
Question: How much revenue should BEAN recognize on this
transaction?
Step 1  As in our previous examples, with the sale of a large cup of coffee or the
sale of a large cup of coffee and two bagels, a valid contract exists. The same is
true for the sale of Smoke Jumper beans.
Step 2  The identification of the performance obligation is straightforward.
BEAN has a performance obligation to provide a bag of Smoke Jumper coffee
beans to Tyler. BEAN has no other performance obligation to provide a product
or service.
Step 3 The transaction price for a bag of Smoke Jumper beans sold to Tyler is
$9, not $10. The transaction price is the amount that a company expects to

--- Page 1530 ---
receive from a customer in exchange for transferring goods and services. [5] The
transaction price in a contract is often easily determined because the customer
agrees to pay a fixed amount to the company over a short period of time. In
other contracts, companies must consider adjustments such as when they make
payments or provide some other consideration to their customers (e.g., a
coupon) as part of a revenue arrangement.3
Step 4  BEAN allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations.
Given that there is only one performance obligation, no allocation is necessary.
Step 5  BEAN has satisfied the performance obligation, as control of the product
has passed to Tyler.
Solution: BEAN should recognize $9 of revenue when Tyler receives the Smoke
Jumper coffee beans.
Allocating the Transaction Price to Separate Performance Obligations—Step
4
For revenue arrangements with multiple performance obligations, BEAN might
be required to allocate the transaction price to more than one performance
obligation in the contract. If an allocation is needed, the transaction price is
allocated to the various performance obligations based on their relative
standalone selling prices. If this information is not available, companies should
use their best estimate of what the good or service might sell for as a standalone
item. [6]
BEAN wants to provide even more incentive for customers to buy its coffee
beans, as well as purchase a cup of coffee. BEAN therefore offers customers a $2
discount on the purchase of a large cup of coffee when they buy a bag of its
premium Motor Moka beans (which normally sell for $12) at the same time.
Tyler decides this offer is too good to pass up and buys a bag of Motor Moka
beans for $12 and a large cup of coffee for $1. As indicated earlier, a large cup of
coffee normally retails for $3 at BEAN.
Question: How much revenue should BEAN recognize on the purchase
of these two items?
Step 1  In our previous situations, valid contracts have existed. The same is also
true for the sale of a bag of Motor Moka beans and the large cup of coffee.
Step 2  The bag of Motor Moka beans and the large cup of coffee are distinct
from one another and are not highly dependent on or highly interrelated with
the other. BEAN can sell a bag of the Motor Moka beans and a large cup of coffee
separately. Furthermore, Tyler benefits separately from both the large cup of
coffee and the Motor Moka coffee beans.

--- Page 1531 ---
Step 3 BEAN’s transaction price is $13 ($12 for the bag of Motor Moka beans
and $1 for the large cup of coffee).
Step 4 BEAN allocates the transaction price to the two performance obligations
based on their relative standalone selling prices. The standalone selling price of
a bag of Motor Moka beans is $12, and the large cup of coffee is $3. The
allocation of the transaction price of $13 is as follows.
Product
Standalone Selling
Price
Percentage
Allocated
Amount
Motor Moka beans (one
bag)
$12 80% ($12 ÷
$15)
$10.40 ($13 ×
.80)
Large cup of coffee
3
20
($3 ÷
$15)
2.60 ($13 ×
.20)
Total
$15 100%
$13.00
As indicated, the total transaction price ($13) is allocated $10.40 to the bag of
Motor Moka beans and $2.60 to the large cup of coffee.
Step 5  BEAN has satisfied both performance obligations as control of the bag of
Motor Moka beans and the large cup of coffee has passed to Tyler.
Solution: BEAN should recognize revenue of $13, comprised of revenue from
the sale of the Motor Moka beans at $10.40 and the sale of the large cup of
coffee at $2.60.
Recognizing Revenue When (or as) Each Performance Obligation Is
Satisfied—Step 5
As indicated in the examples presented, BEAN satisfied its performance
obligation(s) when Tyler obtained control of the product(s). Change in control is
the deciding factor in determining when a performance obligation is satisfied. A
customer controls the product or service when the customer has the ability to
direct the use of and obtain substantially all the remaining benefits from the
product. Control also includes Tyler’s ability to prevent other companies from
directing the use of, or receiving benefits from, the coffee or coffee beans. As
discussed earlier, the indicators that Tyler has obtained control are as follows:
a. BEAN has the right to payment for the coffee.
b. BEAN has transferred legal title to the coffee.
c. BEAN has transferred physical possession of the coffee.
d. Tyler has significant risks and rewards of ownership.

--- Page 1532 ---
e. Tyler has accepted the asset.4
The Five-Step Process Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Understand and apply the five-step revenue recognition process.
The Airbus and BEAN examples provide a basic understanding of the five-step
process used to recognize revenue. We now discuss more technical issues related
to the implementation of these five steps.
Identifying the Contract with Customers—Step 1
A contract is an agreement between two or more parties that creates
enforceable rights or obligations. Contracts can be written, oral, or implied from
customary business practice (such as the BEAN contract with Tyler). Revenue is
recognized only when a valid contract exists. On entering into a contract with a
customer, a company obtains rights to receive consideration from the customer
and assumes obligations to transfer goods or services to the customer
(performance obligations). The combination of those rights and performance
obligations gives rise to an (net) asset or (net) liability.
In some cases, there are multiple contracts related to an arrangement; accounting
for each contract may or may not occur, depending upon the circumstances.
These situations often develop when not only a product is provided but some type
of service is performed as well. To be valid, a contract must meet the five
conditions illustrated in the BEAN example.5 If the contract is wholly
unperformed and each party can unilaterally terminate the contract without
compensation, then revenue should not be recognized until one or both of the
parties has performed. A basic contract where these issues are discussed follows
in Illustration 18.3.

--- Page 1533 ---
Contracts and Recognition
Facts: On March 1, 2022, Margo Company enters into a contract to transfer a
product to Soon Yoon on July 31, 2022. The contract is structured such that
Soon Yoon is required to pay the full contract price of $5,000 on August 31,
2022. The cost of the goods transferred is $3,000. Margo delivers the product to
Soon Yoon on July 31, 2022. Either party can unilaterally terminate the contract
without compensation.
Question: What journal entries should Margo Company make in
regards to this contract in 2022?
Solution: No entry is required on March 1, 2022, because neither party has
performed on the contract. On July 31, 2022, Margo delivers the product and
therefore should recognize revenue on that date as it satisfies its performance
obligation by delivering the product to Soon Yoon.
The journal entry to record the sale and related cost of goods sold is as follows.
July 31, 2022
Accounts Receivable 5,000
Sales Revenue
5,000
Cost of Goods Sold
3,000
Inventory
3,000
After receiving the cash payment on August 31, 2022, Margo makes the
following entry.
August 31, 2022
Cash
5,000
Accounts Receivable
5,000
ILLUSTRATION 18.3 Basic Revenue Transaction
A key feature of the revenue arrangement is that the contract between the two
parties is not recorded (does not result in a journal entry) until one or both of the
parties perform under the contract. Until performance occurs, no net asset
or net liability occurs.
Identifying Separate Performance Obligations—Step 2

--- Page 1534 ---
A performance obligation is a promise to provide a product or service to a
customer. This promise may be explicit, implicit, or possibly based on customary
business practice. To determine whether a performance obligation exists, the
company must provide a distinct product or service to the customer.
A product or service is distinct when a customer is able to benefit from a good or
service on its own or together with other readily available resources. This
situation typically occurs when the company can sell a good or service on a
standalone basis (i.e., separately). For example, BEAN provided a good (a large
cup of coffee) on a standalone basis to Tyler. Tyler benefited from this cup of
coffee by consuming it.
To determine whether a company has to account for multiple performance
obligations, the company’s promise to sell the good or service to the customer
must be separately identifiable from other promises within the contract (that is,
the good or service must be distinct within the contract). The objective is to
determine whether the nature of a company’s promise is to transfer
individual goods and services to the customer or to transfer a
combined item (or items) for which individual goods or services are
inputs.
For example, when BEAN sold Tyler a large cup of coffee and two bagels, Bean
had two performance obligations. In that case, the large cup of coffee had a
standalone selling price and the two bagels had a standalone selling price—even
though the two promises may be part of one contract.
Conversely, assume that BEAN sold a large latte (comprised of coffee and milk)
to Tyler. In this case, BEAN sold two distinct products (coffee and milk), but
these two goods are not distinct within the contract. That is, the coffee and milk
in the latte are highly interdependent or interrelated within the contract. As a
result, the products are combined and reported as one performance obligation.
To illustrate another situation, assume that Tata Motors (IND) sells an
automobile to Marquart Auto Dealers at a price that includes six months of
telematics services such as navigation and remote diagnostics. These telematics
services are regularly sold on a standalone basis by Tata Motors for a monthly
fee. After the six-month period, the consumer can renew these services on a fee
basis with Tata Motors. The question is whether Tata Motors sold one or two
products. If we look at Tata Motors’ objective, it appears that it is to sell two
goods, the automobile and the telematic services. Both are distinct (they can
be sold separately) and are not interdependent.
As another example, SoftTech Inc. licenses customer-relationship software to
Lopez Company. In addition to providing the software itself, SoftTech promises
to perform consulting services by extensively customizing the software to Lopez’s
information technology environment, for total consideration of $600,000. In this

--- Page 1535 ---
case, the objective of SoftTech appears to be to transfer a combined product and
service for which individual goods and services are inputs. In other words,
SoftTech is providing a significant service by integrating the goods and services
(the license and the consulting service) into one combined item for which Lopez
has contracted. In addition, the software is significantly customized by SoftTech
in accordance with specifications negotiated by Lopez. As a result, the license
and the consulting services are distinct but interdependent, and
therefore should be accounted for as one performance obligation.6
Determining the Transaction Price—Step 3
The transaction price is the amount of consideration that a company expects
to receive from a customer in exchange for transferring goods and services. The
transaction price in a contract is often easily determined because the customer
agrees to pay a fixed amount to the company over a short period of time. In other
contracts, companies must consider the following factors. [8]
Variable consideration.
Time value of money.
Non-cash consideration.
Consideration paid or payable to the customer.
Variable Consideration
In some cases, the price of a good or service is dependent on future events. These
future events might include price increases, volume discounts, rebates, credits,
performance bonuses, or royalties. In these cases, the company estimates the
amount of variable consideration it will receive from the contract to determine
the amount of revenue to recognize. Companies use either the expected value,
which is a probability-weighted amount, or the most likely amount in a range
of possible amounts to estimate variable consideration (see Underlying
Concepts). Companies select among these two methods based on which
approach better predicts the amount of consideration to which a company is
entitled. [9] Illustration 18.4 highlights the issues to be considered in
selecting the appropriate method.
Underlying Concepts
The expected value approach is also illustrated in Chapter 6 to determine the
liability for warranties.

--- Page 1536 ---
Expected Value: Probability-
weighted amount in a range of
possible consideration amounts.
Most Likely Amount: The single most
likely amount in a range of possible
consideration outcomes.
May be appropriate if a company
has a large number of contracts
with similar characteristics.
Can be based on a limited number
of discrete outcomes and
probabilities.
May be appropriate if the contract
has only two possible outcomes.
ILLUSTRATION 18.4 Estimating Variable Consideration
Illustration 18.5 provides an application of the two estimation methods.

--- Page 1537 ---
Estimating Variable Consideration
Facts: Peabody Construction Company enters into a contract with a customer to
build a warehouse for $100,000, with a performance bonus of $50,000 that will
be paid based on the timing of completion. The amount of the performance
bonus decreases by 10% per week for every week beyond the agreed-upon
completion date. The contract requirements are similar to contracts that
Peabody has performed previously, and management believes that such
experience is predictive for this contract. Management estimates that there is a
60% probability that the contract will be completed by the agreed-upon
completion date, a 30% probability that it will be completed 1 week late, and only
a 10% probability that it will be completed 2 weeks late.
Question: How should Peabody account for this revenue
arrangement?
Solution: The transaction price should include management’s estimate of the
amount of consideration to which Peabody will be entitled. Management has
concluded that the probability-weighted method is the most predictive
approach for estimating the variable consideration in this situation:
On time: 60% chance of $150,000 [$100,000 + ($50,000 × 1.0)] = $ 90,000
1 week late: 30% chance of $145,000 [$100,000 + ($50,000 × .90)]
=
43,500
2 weeks late: 10% chance of $140,000 [$100,000 + ($50,000 ×
.80)] =
14,000
$147,500
Thus, the total transaction price is $147,500 based on the probability-weighted
estimate. Management should update its estimate at each reporting date.
Using a most likely outcome approach may be more predictive if a
performance bonus is binary (Peabody either will or will not earn the
performance bonus), such that Peabody earns either $50,000 for completion
on the agreed-upon date or nothing for completion after the agreed-upon date.
In this scenario, if management believes that Peabody will meet the deadline
and estimates the consideration using the most likely outcome, the total
transaction price would be $150,000 (the outcome with 60% probability).
ILLUSTRATION 18.5 Transaction Price—Variable Consideration

--- Page 1538 ---
A word of caution—a company only allocates variable consideration if it is
reasonably assured that it will be entitled to that amount. Companies
therefore may only recognize variable consideration if (1) they have experience
with similar contracts and are able to estimate the cumulative amount of
revenue, and (2) based on experience, it is highly probable that there will not be a
significant reversal of revenue previously recognized.7 If these criteria are not
met, revenue recognition is constrained. [11] Illustration 18.6 provides
an example of how the revenue constraint works.
Revenue Constraint
Facts: On January 1, Shera Company enters into a contract with Hornung Inc. to
perform asset-management services for 1 year. Shera receives a quarterly
management fee based on a percentage of Hornung’s assets under management
at the end of each quarter. In addition, Shera receives a performance-based
incentive fee of 20% of the fund’s return in excess of the return of an observable
index at the end of the year.
Shera accounts for the contract as a single performance obligation to perform
investment-management services for 1 year because the services are
interdependent and interrelated. To recognize revenue for satisfying the
performance obligation over time, Shera selects an output method of measuring
progress toward complete satisfaction of the performance obligation. Shera has
had a number of these types of contracts with customers in the past.
Question: At what point should Shera recognize the management fee
and the performance-based incentive fee related to Hornung?
Solution: Shera should record the management fee each quarter as it performs
the management of the fund. However, Shera should not record the incentive
fee until the end of the year. Although Shera has experience with similar
contracts, that experience is not predictive of the outcome of the current
contract because the amount of consideration is highly susceptible to volatility
in the market. In addition, the incentive fee has a large number and high
variability of possible consideration amounts. Thus, revenue related to the
incentive fee is constrained (not recognized) until the incentive fee is known
at the end of the year.
ILLUSTRATION 18.6 Transaction Price—Revenue Constraint
Time Value of Money

--- Page 1539 ---
Timing of payment to the company sometimes does not match the transfer of the
goods or services to the customer. In most situations, companies receive
consideration after the product is provided or the service performed. In essence,
the company provides financing for the customer.
Companies account for the time value of money if the contract involves a
significant financing component. When a sales transaction involves a
significant financing component (i.e., interest is accrued on consideration to be
paid over time), the fair value is determined either by measuring the
consideration received or by discounting the payment using an imputed interest
rate. The imputed interest rate is the more clearly determinable of either (1) the
prevailing rate for a similar instrument of an issuer with a similar credit rating, or
(2) a rate of interest that discounts the nominal amount of the instrument to the
current sales price of the goods or services. The company will report the effects of
the financing as interest revenue. Illustration 18.7 provides an example of a
financing transaction.

--- Page 1540 ---
Extended Payment Terms
Facts: On July 1, 2022, SEK Industries sold goods to Grant Company for
R$900,000 in exchange for a 4-year, zero-interest-bearing note with a face
amount of R$1,416,163. The goods have an inventory cost on SEK’s books of
R$590,000.
Question: (a) How much revenue should SEK record on July 1, 2022?
(b) How much revenue should it report related to this transaction on
December 31, 2022?
Solution:
a. SEK should record revenue of R$900,000 on July 1, 2022, which is the
fair value of the inventory in this case.
b. SEK is also financing this purchase and records interest revenue on the
note over the 4-year period. In this case, the interest rate is imputed and
is determined to be 12%. SEK records interest revenue of R$54,000 (.12 ×
½ × R$900,000) at December 31, 2022.
The entry to record SEK’s sale to Grant Company is as follows.
July 1, 2022
Notes Receivable (R$1,416,163 – R$516,163) 900,000
Sales Revenue
900,000
The related entry to record the cost of goods sold is as follows.
July 1, 2022
Cost of Goods Sold 590,000
Inventory
590,000
SEK makes the following entry to record (accrue) interest revenue at the end
of the year.
December 31, 2022
Notes Receivable
54,000
Interest Revenue (.12 × ½ × R$900,000)
54,000
ILLUSTRATION 18.7 Transaction Price—Extended Payment Terms

--- Page 1541 ---
As a practical expedient, companies are not required to reflect the time value of
money to determine the transaction price if the time period for payment is less
than a year. [12]
Non-Cash Consideration
Companies sometimes receive consideration in the form of goods, services, or
other non-cash consideration. When these situations occur, companies
generally recognize revenue on the basis of the fair value of what is
received. For example, assume that Raylin Company receives ordinary shares of
Monroe Company in payment for consulting services. In that case, Raylin
Company recognizes revenue in the amount of the fair value of the ordinary
shares received. If Raylin cannot determine this amount, then it should estimate
the selling price of the services performed and recognize this amount as revenue.
In addition, companies sometimes receive contributions (e.g., donations and
gifts). A contribution is often some type of asset (e.g., securities, land, buildings,
or use of facilities), but it could be the forgiveness of debt. In these cases,
companies recognize revenue for the fair value of the consideration received.
Similarly, customers sometimes contribute goods or services, such as equipment
or labor, as consideration for goods provided or services performed. This
consideration should be recognized as revenue based on the fair value of the
consideration received.
Consideration Paid or Payable to Customers
Companies often make payments to their customers as part of a revenue
arrangement. Consideration paid or payable may include discounts, volume
rebates, coupons, free products, or services. In general, these elements reduce the
consideration received and the revenue to be recognized. Illustration 18.8
provides an example of this type of transaction.

--- Page 1542 ---
Volume Discount
Facts: Sansung Group offers its customers a 3% volume discount if they
purchase at least ¥2 million of its product during the calendar year. On March
31, 2022, Sansung has made sales of ¥700,000 to Artic Co. In the previous 2
years, Sansung sold over ¥3,000,000 to Artic in the period April 1 to December
31. Assume that Sansung prepares financial statements quarterly.
Question: How much revenue should Sansung recognize for the first 3
months of 2022?
Solution: In this case, Sansung should reduce its revenue by ¥21,000
(¥700,000 × .03) because it is probable that it will provide this rebate.
Revenue is therefore ¥679,000 (¥700,000 − ¥21,000). To not recognize this
volume discount overstates Sansung’s revenue for the first 3 months of 2022.
In other words, the appropriate revenue is ¥679,000, not ¥700,000.
Given these facts, Sansung makes the following entry on March 31, 2022, to
recognize revenue.
Accounts Receivable 679,000
Sales Revenue
679,000
Assuming that Sansung’s customer meets the discount threshold, Sansung
makes the following entry to record collection of accounts receivable.
Cash
679,000
Accounts Receivable
679,000
If Sansung’s customer fails to meet the discount threshold, Sansung
makes the following entry to record collection of accounts receivable.
Cash
700,000
Accounts Receivable
679,000
Sales (Volume) Discounts Forfeited
21,000
As indicated in Chapter 7, Sales Discounts Forfeited is reported in the “Other
income and expense” section of the income statement.
ILLUSTRATION 18.8 Transaction Price—Volume Discount
In many cases, companies provide cash discounts to customers for a short period
of time (often referred to as prompt settlement discounts). For example, assume

--- Page 1543 ---
that terms are payment due in 60 days, but if payment is made within five days, a
two percent discount is given (referred to as 2/5, net 60). These prompt
settlement discounts should reduce revenues, if material. In most cases,
companies record the revenue at full price (gross) and record a sales discount if
payment is made within the discount period.
Allocating the Transaction Price to Separate Performance
Obligations—Step 4
Companies often have to allocate the transaction price to more than one
performance obligation in a contract. If an allocation is needed, the transaction
price allocated to the various performance obligations is based on their relative
fair values. The best measure of fair value is what the company could sell the
good or service for on a standalone basis, referred to as the standalone selling
price. If this information is not available, companies should use their best
estimate of what the good or service might sell for as a standalone unit.
Illustration 18.9 summarizes the approaches that companies follow (in
preferred order of use).
Allocation
Approach
Implementation
Adjusted
market
assessment
approach
Evaluate the market in which a company sells goods or services and
estimate the price that customers in that market are willing to pay
for those goods or services. That approach also might include
referring to prices from the company’s competitors for similar
goods or services and adjusting those prices as necessary to reflect
the company’s costs and margins.
Expected
cost plus a
margin
approach
Forecast expected costs of satisfying a performance obligation and
then add an appropriate margin for that good or service.
Residual
approach
If the standalone selling price of a good or service is highly variable
or uncertain, then a company may estimate the standalone selling
price by reference to the total transaction price less the sum of the
observable standalone selling prices of other goods or services
promised in the contract.8
ILLUSTRATION 18.9 Transaction Price—Allocation
To illustrate, Travis Merchants enters into a contract with a customer to sell
Products A, B, and C in exchange for £100,000. Travis regularly sells Product A
separately, and therefore the standalone selling price is directly observable at
£50,000. The standalone selling price of Product B is estimated using the

--- Page 1544 ---
adjusted market assessment approach and is determined to be £30,000. Travis
decides to use the residual approach to value Product C, as it has confidence that
Products A and B are valued correctly. The selling price for the products is
allocated as shown in Illustration 18.10.
Product
Price
Rationale
A
£ 50,000 Directly observable using standalone selling price.
B
30,000
Directly observable using adjusted market assessment
approach.
C
20,000
[£100,000 − (£50,000 + £30,000)]; using the residual
approach given reliability of the two above
measurements.
Total
transaction
price
£100,000
ILLUSTRATION 18.10 Residual Value Allocation
Illustrations 18.11 and 18.12 are additional examples of the measurement
issues involved in allocating the transaction price.

--- Page 1545 ---
Multiple Performance Obligations—Example 1
Facts: Lonnie Company enters into a contract to build, run, and maintain a
highly complex piece of electronic equipment for a period of 5 years,
commencing upon delivery of the equipment. There is a fixed fee for each of the
build, run, and maintenance deliverables, and any progress payments made are
non-refundable. It is determined that the transaction price must be allocated to
the three performance obligations: building, running, and maintaining the
equipment. There is verifiable evidence of the selling price for the building and
maintenance but not for running the equipment.
Question: What procedure should Lonnie Company use to allocate the
transaction price to the three performance obligations?
Solution: The performance obligations relate to building the equipment,
running the equipment, and maintaining the equipment. As indicated, Lonnie
can determine verifiable standalone selling prices for the equipment and the
maintenance agreements. The company then can make a best estimate of the
selling price for running the equipment, using the adjusted market assessment
approach or expected cost plus a margin approach. Lonnie next applies the
proportional standalone selling price method at the inception of the
transaction to determine the proper allocation to each performance obligation.
Once the allocation is performed, Lonnie recognizes revenue independently
for each performance obligation using regular revenue recognition criteria.
If, on the other hand, Lonnie is unable to estimate the standalone selling price
for running the equipment because such an estimate is highly variable or
uncertain, Lonnie may use a residual approach. In this case, Lonnie uses the
standalone selling prices of the equipment and maintenance agreements and
subtracts these prices from the total transaction price to arrive at a residual
value for running the equipment.
ILLUSTRATION 18.11 Allocation—Multiple Performance Obligations

--- Page 1546 ---
Multiple Performance Obligations—Example 2
Facts: Handler Company is an established manufacturer of equipment used in
the construction industry. Handler’s products range from small to large
individual pieces of automated machinery to complex systems containing
numerous components. Unit selling prices range from $600,000 to $4,000,000
and are quoted inclusive of installation and training. The installation process
does not involve changes to the features of the equipment and does not require
proprietary information about the equipment in order for the installed
equipment to perform to specifications. Handler has the following arrangement
with Chai Company.
Chai purchases equipment from Handler for a price of $2,000,000 and
chooses Handler to do the installation. Handler charges the same price for
the equipment irrespective of whether it does the installation or not. (Some
companies do the installation themselves because they either prefer their
own employees to do the work or because of relationships with other
customers.) The installation service included in the arrangement is
estimated to have a standalone selling price of $20,000.
The standalone selling price of the training sessions is estimated at
$50,000. Other companies can also perform these training services.
Chai is obligated to pay Handler the $2,000,000 upon the delivery and
installation of the equipment.
Handler delivers and completes installation of the equipment on November
1, 2022. Training related to the equipment starts once the installation is
completed and lasts for 1 year. The equipment has a useful life of 10 years.
Questions: (a) What are the performance obligations for purposes of
accounting for the sale of the equipment? (b) If there is more than one
performance obligation, how should the payment of $2,000,000 be
allocated to various components?
Solution:
a. Handler’s primary objective is to sell equipment. The other services
(installation and training) can be performed by other parties if necessary.
As a result, the equipment, installation, and training are three separate
products or services. Each of these items has a standalone selling price,
and the items are not interdependent.

--- Page 1547 ---
b. The total revenue of $2,000,000 should be allocated to the three
components based on their relative standalone selling prices. In this case,
the standalone selling price of the equipment is $2,000,000, the
installation fee is $20,000, and the training is $50,000. The total
standalone selling price therefore is $2,070,000 ($2,000,000 + $20,000 +
$50,000). The allocation is as follows.
Equipment $1,932,367 [($2,000,000 ÷ $2,070,000) × $2,000,000]
Installation
$19,324 [($20,000 ÷ $2,070,000) × $2,000,000]
Training
$48,309 [($50,000 ÷ $2,070,000) × $2,000,000]
Handler makes the following entry on November 1, 2022, to record both sales
revenue and service revenue on the installation, as well as unearned service
revenue.
November 1, 2022
Cash
2,000,000
Service Revenue (installation)
19,324
Unearned Service Revenue
48,309
Sales Revenue
1,932,367
Assuming the cost of the equipment is $1,500,000, the entry to record cost of
goods sold is as follows.
November 1, 2022
Cost of Goods Sold 1,500,000
Inventory
1,500,000
As indicated by these entries, Handler recognizes revenue from the sale of the
equipment on November 1, 2022. In addition, it recognizes revenue for the
installation fee because these services have been performed.
Handler recognizes the training revenues on a straight-line basis starting on
November 1, 2022, or $4,026 ($48,309 ÷ 12) per month for 1 year (unless a
more appropriate method such as the percentage-of-completion method—
discussed in the next section—is warranted). The journal entry to recognize
the training revenue for 2 months in 2022 is as follows.
December 31, 2022
Unearned Service Revenue
8,052
Service Revenue (training) ($4,026 × 2)
8,052

--- Page 1548 ---
Therefore, Handler recognizes revenue at December 31, 2022, in the amount
of $1,959,743 ($1,932,367 + $19,324 + $8,052). Handler makes the following
journal entry to recognize the remaining training revenue in 2023, assuming
adjusting entries are made at year-end.
December 31, 2023
Unearned Service Revenue
40,257
Service Revenue (training) ($48,309 − $8,052)
40,257
ILLUSTRATION 18.12 Multiple Performance Obligations—Product,
Installation, and Service
Recognizing Revenue When (or as) Each Performance Obligation
Is Satisfied—Step 5
A company satisfies its performance obligation when the customer obtains
control of the good or service. As indicated in the Handler example (in
Illustration 18.12) and the BEAN example, the concept of change in control is the
deciding factor in determining when a performance obligation is satisfied. The
customer controls the product or service when it has the ability to direct the use
of and obtain substantially all the remaining benefits from the asset or service.
Control also includes the customer’s ability to prevent other companies from
directing the use of, or receiving the benefits, from the asset or service.
Illustration 18.13 summarizes the indicators that the customer has obtained
control. [14]
1. The company has a right to payment for the asset.
2. The company has transferred legal title to the asset.
3. The company has transferred physical possession of the asset.
4. The customer has significant risks and rewards of ownership.
5. The customer has accepted the asset.
ILLUSTRATION 18.13 Change in Control Indicators
This is a list of indicators, not requirements or criteria. Not all of the indicators
need to be met for management to conclude that control has transferred and
revenue can be recognized. Management must use judgment to determine
whether the factors collectively indicate that the customer has obtained control.
This assessment should be focused primarily on the customer’s perspective.

--- Page 1549 ---
Companies satisfy performance obligations either at a point in time or over a
period of time. Companies recognize revenue over a period of time if one of the
following three criteria is met.
1. The customer receives and consumes the benefits as the seller performs.
2. The customer controls the asset as it is created or enhanced (e.g., a builder
constructs a building on a customer’s property).
3. The company does not have an alternative use for the asset created or
enhanced (e.g., an aircraft manufacturer builds specialty jets to a customer’s
specifications); and either (a) the customer receives benefits as the company
performs, and therefore the task would not need to be re-performed, or (b)
the company has a right to payment, and this right is enforceable.
Illustration 18.14 provides an example of the point in time when revenue
should be recognized.
Timing of Revenue Recognition
Facts: Gomez Software enters into a contract with Hurly Company to develop
and install customer relationship management (CRM) software. Progress
payments are made upon completion of each stage of the contract. If the
contract is terminated, then the partially completed CRM software passes to
Hurly Company. Gomez Software is prohibited from redirecting the software to
another customer.
Question: At what point should Gomez Software recognize revenue
related to its contract with Hurly Company?
Solution: Gomez Software does not create an asset with an alternative use
because it is prohibited from redirecting the software to another customer. In
addition, Gomez Software is entitled to payments for performance to date and
expects to complete the project. Therefore, Gomez Software concludes that the
contract meets the criteria for recognizing revenue over time.
ILLUSTRATION 18.14 Satisfying a Performance Obligation
A company recognizes revenue from a performance obligation over time by
measuring the progress toward completion. The method selected for measuring
progress should depict the transfer of control from the company to the customer.
For many service arrangements, revenue is recognized on a straight-
line basis because the performance obligation is being satisfied ratably

--- Page 1550 ---
over the contract period. In other settings (e.g., long-term construction
contracts), companies use various methods to determine the extent of progress
toward completion. The most common are the cost-to-cost and units-of-delivery
methods. The objective of all these methods is to measure the extent of progress
in terms of costs, units, or value added. Companies identify the various measures
(costs incurred, labor hours worked, tons produced, floors completed, etc.) and
classify them as input or output measures.
Input measures (e.g., costs incurred and labor hours worked) are efforts devoted
to a contract. Output measures (with units of delivery measured as tons
produced, floors of a building completed, miles of a highway completed, etc.)
track results. Neither is universally applicable to all long-term projects. Their use
requires the exercise of judgment and careful tailoring to the circumstances.
The most popular input measure used to determine the progress toward
completion is the cost-to-cost basis. Under this basis, a company measures the
percentage of completion by comparing costs incurred to date with the most
recent estimate of the total costs required to complete the contract. The
percentage-of-completion method is discussed more fully in Appendix 18A, which
examines the accounting for long-term contracts.
Summary
Illustration 18.15 provides a summary of the five-step revenue recognition
process.

--- Page 1551 ---
Step in
Process
Description
Implementation
1. Identify the
contract
with
customers.
A contract is an
agreement that creates
enforceable rights or
obligations.
A company applies the revenue
guidance to contracts with customers.
2. Identify the
separate
performance
obligations
in the
contract.
A performance
obligation is a promise
in a contract to provide
a product or service to a
customer. A
performance obligation
exists if the customer
can benefit from the
good or service on its
own or together with
other readily available
resources.
A contract may be comprised of
multiple performance obligations.
The accounting for multiple
performance obligations is based on
evaluation of whether the product or
service is distinct within the contract.
If each of the goods or services is
distinct, but are all interdependent
and interrelated, these goods and
services are combined and reported
as one performance obligation.
3. Determine
the
transaction
price.
The transaction price is
the amount of
consideration that a
company expects to
receive from a
customer in exchange
for transferring goods
and services.
In determining the transaction price,
companies must consider the
following factors: (1) variable
consideration, (2) time value of
money, (3) non-cash consideration,
and (4) consideration paid or payable
to customer.
4. Allocate the
transaction
price to the
separate
performance
obligations.
If more than one
performance obligation
exists, allocate the
transaction price based
on relative fair values.
The best measure of fair value is
what the good or service could be
sold for on a standalone basis
(standalone selling price). Estimates
of standalone selling price can be
based on (1) adjusted market
assessment, (2) expected cost plus a
margin approach, or (3) a residual
approach.
5. Recognize
A company satisfies its
performance obligation
Companies satisfy performance
obligations either at a point in time

--- Page 1552 ---
revenue
when each
performance
obligation is
satisfied.
when the customer
obtains control of the
good or service.
or over a period of time. Companies
recognize revenue over a period of
time if one of the following criteria is
met: (1) the customer receives and
consumes the benefits as the seller
performs, (2) the customer controls
the asset as it is created, or (3) the
company does not have an alternative
use for the asset.
ILLUSTRATION 
18.15 
Summary 
of 
the 
Five-Step 
Revenue
Recognition Process
Accounting for Revenue Recognition Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Apply the five-step process to major revenue recognition issues.
This section addresses revenue recognition issues found in practice. Most of
these issues relate to determining the transaction price (Step 3) and evaluating
when control of the product or service passes to the customer (Step 5). The
revenue recognition principle and the concept of control are illustrated for the
following situations.
Sales returns and allowances.
Repurchase agreements.
Bill-and-hold arrangements.
Principal-agent relationships.
Consignments.
Warranties.
Non-refundable upfront fees.
Sales Returns and Allowances
Sales returns and allowances are very common for many companies that sell
goods to customers. For example, assume that Fafco Solar sells solar panels to
customers on account. Fafco grants customers the right of return for these panels
for various reasons (e.g., dissatisfaction with the product) and to receive any
combination of the following.

--- Page 1553 ---
1. A full or partial refund of any consideration paid.
2. A credit that can be applied against amounts owed, or that will be owed, to
the seller.
3. Another product in exchange.
To account for these sales returns and allowances, Fafco should recognize the
following:
a. Revenue for the transferred solar panels in the amount of consideration to
which Fafco is reasonably assured to be entitled (considering the products to
be returned or allowance granted).
b. An asset (and corresponding adjustment to cost of goods sold) for the goods
expected to be returned from customers.
Credit Sales with Returns and Allowances
To illustrate the accounting for a return situation in more detail, assume that on
January 12, 2022, Venden NV sells 100 cameras for €100 each on account to
Amaya SA. Venden allows Amaya to return any unused cameras within 45 days of
purchase. The cost of each product is €60. Venden estimates that:
1. Three products will be returned.
2. The cost of recovering the products will be immaterial.
3. The returned products are expected to be resold at a profit.
On January 24, Amaya returns two of the cameras because they are the wrong
color. On January 31, Venden prepares financial statements and determines that
it is likely that only one more camera will be returned. Venden makes the
following entries related to these transactions.
The Sales Returns and Allowances account is a contra account to Sales Revenue.
The Returned Inventory account is used to separate returned inventory from
regular inventory.

--- Page 1554 ---
On January 31, 2022, Venden prepares financial statements. As indicated earlier,
Venden originally estimated that the most likely outcome was that three cameras
would be returned. Venden believes the original estimate is correct and makes
the following adjusting entries to account for expected returns at January 31,
2022.
The Refund Liability account is a current liability. The Estimated Inventory
Returns account will generally be added to the Returned Inventory account at the
end of the reporting period.9
For the month of January, Venden’s income statement reports the information
presented in Illustration 18.16.
Sales revenue (100 × €100)
€10,000
Less: Sales returns and allowances (€200 + €100)
300
Net sales
9,700
Cost of goods sold (97 × €60)
5,820
Gross profit
€ 3,880
ILLUSTRATION 18.16 Income Statement Reporting
As a result, at the end of the reporting period, the net sales reflects the amount
that Venden is expected to be entitled to collect.
Venden reports the information in the statement of financial position as of
January 31, 2022 as shown in Illustration 18.17.

--- Page 1555 ---
Accounts receivable (€10,000 − €200)
€9,800
Returned inventory (including estimated) (3 × €60)
180
Refund liability
100
ILLUSTRATION 18.17 Statement of Financial Position Reporting
Cash Sales with Returns and Allowances
Assume now that Venden sold the cameras to Amaya for cash instead of on
account. In this situation, Venden makes the following entries related to these
transactions.
Assuming that Venden did not pay cash at the time of the return of the two
cameras to Amaya on January 24, 2022, the entries to record the return of the
two cameras and related cost of goods sold are as follows.
Venden records a refund liability to Amaya to recognize that it owes Amaya for
the return of two cameras. As indicated earlier, the Sales Returns and Allowances
account is a contra-revenue account. The Returned Inventory account is used to
separate returned inventory from regular inventory.
On January 31, 2022, Venden prepares financial statements. As indicated earlier,
Venden estimates that the most likely outcome is that one more camera will be
returned. Venden therefore makes the following adjusting entries.

--- Page 1556 ---
At January 31, 2022, Venden records a refund liability to recognize its estimated
additional liability to Amaya for expected future returns. The Estimated
Inventory Returns account will generally be added to the Returned Inventory
account at the end of the reporting period to identify returned and estimated
inventory returns.
Illustration 18.18 presents the information related to these sales that will be
reported on Venden’s income statement for the month of January.
Sales revenue (100 × €100)
€10,000
Less: Sales returns and allowances (3 × €100)
300
Net sales
9,700
Cost of goods sold (97 × €60)
5,820
Gross profit
€ 3,880
ILLUSTRATION 18.18 Income Statement Reporting Sales Returns
and Allowances
On Venden’s statement of financial position as of January 31, 2022, the
information is reported as shown in Illustration 18.19.
Cash (assuming no cash payments to date to Amaya) €10,000
Returned inventory (including estimated) (3 × €60)
180
Refund liability (€200 + €100)
300
ILLUSTRATION 18.19 Statement of Financial Position Reporting
Sales Returns and Allowances
Companies record the returned asset in a separate account from inventory to
provide transparency. The carrying value of the returned asset is subject to
impairment testing, separate from the inventory. If a company is unable to
estimate the level of returns with any reliability, it should not report any revenue
until the returns become predictive.

--- Page 1557 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Boomerang Sales!
With the explosive growth and increasing competition in the e-commerce
world, many new business opportunities and challenges have arisen. For
example, the furniture retailer Wayfair Inc. (USA) has needed to sort out
how to deliver home furnishings (including large furniture items) to their
customers, which is a much more challenging task than small-package
delivery. The company reports it has established multiple warehouses in the
United States, Canada, and Europe, and primarily uses its own employees for
home delivery rather than third-party delivery companies.
As sales have increased, another challenge has arisen in the e-commerce
world—returns. For an industry that ships millions of packages a week,
retailers are now also dealing with returns that can represent as much as one-
third of their original sales. The return rate is especially high for retailers that
sell clothing and footwear items, where sizing and other factors contribute to
returns.
The challenge has reached a point where companies are designing special
“reverse logistics” processes to deal with the returned items. For example, it
has been documented that returned items require 20 percent more
warehouse space, compared to items that have not yet been sold.
As discussed in the chapter, companies must consider the possibility of
returns and how they can impact reported revenues. The issue of returns is
both an operations and an accounting issue.
Sources: McKinsey, “Bulky is beautiful: How Wayfair Is Poised to Meet Massive New Demand for
Home Goods—and Home Delivery,” McKinsey.com (December 2019); Erica E. Phillips, “Holiday
Returns Already Are Flooding Parcel Networks,” Wall Street Journal (December 20, 2018); Steve
Dennis, “The Ticking Time Bomb of E-Commerce Returns,” Forbes.com (February 12, 2018); Diana
Olick, “The Surge in Online-Shopping Returns Has Boosted the Warehouse Sector,” CNBC.com
(January 4, 2019).
Repurchase Agreements
In some cases, companies enter into repurchase agreements, which allow
them to transfer an asset to a customer but have an unconditional (forward)
obligation or unconditional right (call option) to repurchase the asset at a later
date. In these situations, the question is whether the company sold the asset.10
Generally, companies report these transactions as a financing (borrowing). That
is, if the selling company has a forward obligation or call option to repurchase the
asset for an amount greater than or equal to its selling price, then the

--- Page 1558 ---
transaction is a financing transaction by the company.11 Illustration 18.20
examines the issues related to a repurchase agreement.

--- Page 1559 ---
Repurchase Agreement
Facts: Morgan Ltd., an equipment dealer, sells equipment on January 1, 2022, to
Lane Construction for £100,000. It agrees to repurchase this equipment (an
unconditional obligation) from Lane Construction on December 31, 2023, for a
price of £121,000.
Question: Should Morgan Ltd. record a sale for this transaction?
Solution: For a sale and repurchase agreement, the terms of the agreement
need to be analyzed to determine whether Morgan Ltd. has transferred control
to the customer, Lane Construction. As indicated earlier, control of an asset
refers to the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all the benefits
from the asset. Control also includes the ability to prevent other companies
from directing the use of and receiving the benefit from a good or service. In
this case, Morgan continues to have control of the asset because it has agreed
to repurchase the asset at an amount greater than the selling price. Therefore,
this agreement is a financing transaction and not a sale. Thus, the asset is not
removed from the books of Morgan.
Assuming that an interest rate of 10% is imputed from the agreement, Morgan
makes the following entries to record this agreement. Morgan records the
financing on January 1, 2022, as follows.
January 1, 2022
Cash
100,000
Liability to Lane Construction
100,000
Morgan records interest on December 31, 2022, as follows.
December 31, 2022
Interest Expense
10,000
Liability to Lane Construction (£100,000 × .10)
10,000
Morgan records interest and retirement of its liability to Lane as follows.
December 31, 2023
Interest Expense
11,000
Liability to Lane Construction (£110,000 × .10)
11,000
Liability to Lane Construction
121,000
Cash (£100,000 + £10,000 + £11,000)
121,000

--- Page 1560 ---
ILLUSTRATION 18.20 Recognition—Repurchase Agreement
Rather than Morgan Ltd. having a forward or call option to repurchase the asset,
assume that Lane Construction has the option to require Morgan Ltd. to
repurchase the asset at December 31, 2023. This option is a put option; that is,
Lane has the option to put the asset back to Morgan. In this situation, Lane has
control of the asset, as it can keep the equipment or sell it to Morgan or to some
other third party. The value of a put option increases when the value of the
underlying asset (in this case, the equipment) decreases. In determining how to
account for this transaction, Morgan has to determine whether Lane will have an
economic incentive to exercise this put option at the end of 2023.
Specifically, Lane has a significant economic incentive to exercise its put option if
the value of the equipment declines. In this case, the transaction is generally
reported as a financing transaction as shown in Illustration 18.20. That is, Lane
will return (put) the equipment back to Morgan if the repurchase price exceeds
the fair value of the equipment. For example, if the repurchase price of the
equipment is £150,000 but its fair value is £125,000, Lane is better off returning
the equipment to Morgan.
Conversely, if Lane does not have a significant economic incentive to exercise its
put option, then the transaction should be reported as a sale of a product with a
right of return.
Bill-and-Hold Arrangements
A bill-and-hold arrangement is a contract under which an entity bills a
customer for a product but the entity retains physical possession of the product
until it is transferred to the customer at a point in time in the future. Bill-and-
hold sales result when the buyer is not yet ready to take delivery but does take
title and accepts billing. For example, a customer may request a company to enter
into such an arrangement because of (1) lack of available space for the product,
(2) delays in its production schedule, or (3) more than sufficient inventory in its
distribution channel. [16] Illustration 18.21 provides an example of a bill-and-
hold arrangement.

--- Page 1561 ---
Bill and Hold
Facts: Butler A.Ş. sells 450,000 (cost 280,000) of fireplaces on March 1, 2022,
to a local coffee shop, Baristo, which is planning to expand its locations around
the city. Under the agreement, Baristo asks Butler to retain these fireplaces in its
warehouses until the new coffee shops that will house the fireplaces are ready.
Title passes to Baristo at the time the agreement is signed.
Question: When should Butler recognize the revenue from this bill-
and-hold arrangement?
Solution: When to recognize revenue in a bill-and-hold arrangement depends
on the circumstances. Butler determines when it has satisfied its performance
obligation to transfer a product by evaluating when Baristo obtains control of
that product. For Baristo to have obtained control of a product in a bill-and-
hold arrangement, it must meet all of the conditions for change in control plus
all of the following criteria:
a. The reason for the bill-and-hold arrangement must be substantive.
b. The product must be identified separately as belonging to Baristo.
c. The product currently must be ready for physical transfer to Baristo.
d. Butler cannot have the ability to use the product or to direct it to another
customer.
In this case, assuming that the above criteria were met in the contract,
revenue recognition should be permitted at the time the contract is signed.
Butler has transferred control to Baristo; that is, Butler has a right to payment
for the fireplaces and legal title has transferred.
Butler makes the following entry to record the bill-and-hold sale and related
cost of goods sold.
March 1, 2022
Accounts Receivable 450,000
Sales Revenue
450,000
Cost of Goods Sold
280,000
Inventory
280,000

--- Page 1562 ---
ILLUSTRATION 18.21 Recognition—Bill and Hold
Principal-Agent Relationships
In a principal-agent relationship, the principal’s performance obligation is to
provide goods or perform services for a customer. The agent’s performance
obligation is to arrange for the principal to provide these goods or services to a
customer. Examples of principal-agent relationships are as follows.
Preferred Travel Company (agent) facilitates the booking of cruise
excursions by finding customers for Regency Cruise Company (principal).
Priceline (USA) (agent) facilitates the sale of various services such as car
rentals for Hertz (USA) (principal).
In these types of situations, amounts collected on behalf of the principal are not
revenue of the agent. Instead, revenue for the agent is the amount of the
commission it receives (usually a percentage of total revenue). Illustration
18.22 provides an example of the issues related to principal-agent relationships.
Principal-Agent Relationship
Facts: Fly-Away Travel sells airplane tickets for British Airways (BA) (GBR)
to various customers.
Question: What are the performance obligations in this situation and
how should revenue be recognized for both the principal and agent?
Solution: The principal in this case is BA and the agent is Fly-Away Travel.
Because BA has the performance obligation to provide air transportation to the
customer, it is the principal. Fly-Away Travel facilitates the sale of the airline
ticket to the customer in exchange for a fee or commission. Its performance
obligation is to arrange for BA to provide air transportation to the customer.
Although Fly-Away collects the full airfare from the customer, it then remits
this amount to BA less the commission. Fly-Away therefore should not record
the full amount of the fare as revenue on its books—to do so overstates
revenue. Its revenue is the commission, not the full price. Control of
performing the air transportation is with BA, not Fly-Away Travel.
ILLUSTRATION 18.22 Recognition—Principal-Agent Relationship

--- Page 1563 ---
Some might argue that there is no harm in Fly-Away recording revenue for the
full price of the ticket and then charging the cost of the ticket against the revenue
(often referred to as the gross method of recognizing revenue). Others note
that this approach overstates the agent’s revenue and is misleading. The revenue
received is the commission for providing the travel services, not the full fare price
(often referred to as the net approach). The profession believes the net
approach is the correct method for recognizing revenue in a principal-agent
relationship. As a result, the IASB has developed specific criteria to determine
when a principal-agent relationship exists.12 An important feature in deciding
whether Fly-Away is acting as an agent is whether the amount it earns is
predetermined, being either a fixed fee per transaction or a stated percentage of
the amount billed to the customer.
Consignments
A common principal-agent relationship involves consignments. In these cases,
manufacturers (or wholesalers) deliver goods but retain title to the goods until
they are sold. This specialized method of marketing certain types of products
makes use of an agreement known as a consignment. Under this arrangement,
the consignor (manufacturer or wholesaler) ships merchandise to the
consignee (dealer), who is to act as an agent for the consignor in selling the
merchandise. Both consignor and consignee are interested in selling—the former
to make a profit or develop a market, the latter to make a commission on the sale.
The consignee accepts the merchandise and agrees to exercise due diligence in
caring for and selling it. The consignee remits to the consignor cash received
from customers, after deducting a sales commission and any chargeable
expenses. In consignment sales, the consignor uses a modified version of the
point-of-sale basis of revenue recognition. That is, the consignor recognizes
revenue only after receiving notification of the sale.
The consignor carries the merchandise as inventory throughout the consignment,
separately classified as Inventory (consignments). The consignee does not
record the merchandise as an asset on its books. Upon sale of the
merchandise, the consignee has a liability for the net amount due the
consignor. The consignor periodically receives from the consignee a report
called account sales that shows the merchandise received, merchandise sold,
expenses chargeable to the consignment, and cash remitted. Revenue is then
recognized by the consignor. Analysis of a consignment arrangement is provided
in Illustration 18.23.

--- Page 1564 ---
Sales on Consignment
Facts: Nelba Manufacturing ships merchandise costing €36,000 on
consignment to Best Value Stores. Nelba pays €3,750 of freight costs, and Best
Value pays €2,250 for local advertising costs that are reimbursable from Nelba.
By the end of the period, Best Value has sold two-thirds of the consigned
merchandise for €40,000 cash. Best Value notifies Nelba of the sales, retains a
10% commission, and remits the cash due Nelba.
Question: What are the journal entries that the consignor (Nelba) and
the consignee (Best Value) make to record this transaction?
Solution:

--- Page 1565 ---
ILLUSTRATION 18.23 Recognition—Sales on Consignment
Under the consignment arrangement, the consignor accepts the risk that the
merchandise might not sell and relieves the consignee of the need to commit part
of its working capital to inventory. Consignors use a variety of systems and
account titles to record consignments, but they all share the common goal of
postponing the recognition of revenue until it is known that a sale to a third party
has occurred. Consignees only recognize commission revenue.
Warranties
As discussed in Chapter 13, companies often provide one of two types of
warranties to customers:
1. Warranties that the product meets agreed-upon specifications in the
contract at the time the product is sold. This type of warranty is
included in the sales price of a company’s product and is often referred to as
an assurance-type warranty.
2. Warranties that provide an additional service beyond the assurance-
type warranty. This warranty is not included in the sales price of the
product and is referred to as a service-type warranty. As a consequence, it
is recorded as a separate performance obligation.
Companies do not record a separate performance obligation for assurance-type
warranties. This type of warranty is nothing more than a quality guarantee that
the good or service is free from defects at the point of sale. In this case, the sale
of the product and the related assurance warranty are one performance
obligation, as they are interdependent of and interrelated with each other. The
objective for companies that issue an assurance warranty is to provide a
combined item (product and a warranty).
These types of obligations should be expensed in the period the goods are
provided or services performed. In addition, the company should record a
warranty liability. The estimated amount of the liability includes all the costs that
the company will incur after sale due to the correction of defects or deficiencies
required under the warranty provisions.
In addition, companies sometimes provide customers with an option to purchase
a warranty separately. In most cases, these extended warranties provide the
customer a service beyond fixing defects that existed at the time of sale. For
example, when you purchase a TV, you are entitled to the company’s warranty.
You will also undoubtedly be offered an extended warranty on the product at an
additional cost. These service-type warranties represent a separate service and

--- Page 1566 ---
are an additional performance obligation. The service-type warranty is sold
separately and therefore has a standalone selling price. In this case, the objective
of the company is to sell an additional service to customers. As a result,
companies should allocate a portion of the transaction price to this performance
obligation, if provided. The company recognizes revenue in the period that the
service-type warranty is in effect. Illustration 18.24 presents an example of
both an assurance-type and a service-type warranty.

--- Page 1567 ---
Warranties
Facts: Maverick Company sold 1,000 Rollomatics on October 1, 2022, at a total
price of $6,000,000, with a warranty guarantee that the product was free of
defects. The cost of the Rollomatics is $4,000,000. The term of this assurance
warranty is 2 years, with an estimated cost of $80,000. In addition, Maverick
sold extended warranties related to 400 Rollomatics for 3 years beyond the 2-
year period for $18,000. On November 22, 2022, Maverick incurred labor costs
of $3,000 and part costs of $25,000 related to the assurance warranties.
Maverick prepares financial statements on December 31, 2022. It estimates that
its future assurance warranty costs will total $44,000 at December 31, 2022.
Question: What are the journal entries that Maverick Company should
make in 2022 related to the sale of the Rollomatics and the assurance
and extended warranties?
Solution: Maverick makes the following entries in 2022 related to Rollomatics
sold with warranties.
October 1, 2022
To record the sale of the Rollomatics and the related extended warranties:
Cash ($6,000,000 + $18,000)
6,018,000
Sales Revenue
6,000,000
Unearned Warranty Revenue
18,000
To record the cost of goods sold and reduce the inventory of Rollomatics:
Cost of Goods Sold
4,000,000
Inventory
4,000,000
November 22, 2022
To record the warranty costs incurred:
Warranty Expense
28,000
Salaries and Wages Payable
3,000
Inventory (parts)
25,000
December 31, 2022
To record the adjusting entry related to its assurance warranty at the end of
the year:
Warranty Expense
44,000
Warranty Liability
44,000

--- Page 1568 ---
ILLUSTRATION 18.24 Recognition—Performance Obligations and
Warranties
Maverick Company makes an adjusting entry to record a liability for the expected
warranty costs related to the sale of the Rollomatics. As the Chapter 13 examples
illustrated, when actual warranty costs are incurred in 2023, the Warranty
Liability account is reduced.13
In most cases, Unearned Warranty Revenue (related to the service-type
warranty) is recognized on a straight-line basis as Warranty Revenue over the
three-year period to which it applies. Revenue related to the extended warranty is
not recognized until the warranty becomes effective on October 1, 2024. If
financial statements are prepared on December 31, 2024, Maverick makes the
following entry to recognize revenue:
Unearned Warranty Revenue
1,500
Warranty Revenue [($18,000 ÷ 36) × 3]
1,500
As indicated, the company also recognizes revenue related to the service-type
warranty over the three-year period that extends beyond the assurance warranty
period (two years). In most cases, the unearned warranty revenue is recognized
on a straight-line basis. The costs associated with the service-type warranty are
expensed as incurred.
Non-refundable Upfront Fees
Companies sometimes receive payments (upfront fees) from customers before
they deliver a product or perform a service. Upfront payments generally relate to
the initiation, activation, or setup of a good or service to be provided or
performed in the future. In most cases, these upfront payments are non-
refundable. Examples include fees paid for membership in a health club or
buying club, and activation fees for phone, Internet, or cable.
Companies must determine whether these non-refundable advance payments are
for products or services in the current period. In most situations, these payments
are for future delivery of products and services and should therefore not be
recorded as revenue at the time of payment. In some cases, the upfront fee is
viewed as being similar to a renewal option for future products and services at a
reduced price. An example would be a health club where once the initiation fee is
paid, no additional fee is necessary upon renewal. Illustration 18.25 provides
an example of an upfront fee payment.

--- Page 1569 ---
Upfront fee Considerations
Facts: Erica Felise signs a 1-year contract with Bigelow Health Club. The terms
of the contract are that Erica is required to pay a non-refundable initiation fee of
£200 and a membership fee of £50 per month. Bigelow determines that its
customers, on average, renew their annual membership two times before
terminating their membership.
Question: What is the amount of revenue Bigelow Health Club should
recognize in the first year?
Solution: In this case, the membership fee arrangement may be viewed as a
single performance obligation (similar services are provided in all periods).
That is, Bigelow is providing a discounted price in the second and third years
for the same services, and this should be reflected in the revenue recognized in
those periods. Bigelow determines the total transaction price to be £2,000—
the upfront fee of £200 and the three years of monthly fees of £1,800 (£50 ×
36)—and allocates it over the 3 years. In this case, Bigelow would report
revenue of £55.56 (£2,000 ÷ 36) each month for 3 years. Unless otherwise
instructed, use this approach for homework problems.14
ILLUSTRATION 
18.25 
Transaction 
Price—Upfront 
Fee
Considerations
Summary
Illustration 18.26 provides a summary of the additional issues related to
transfer of control and revenue recognition.

--- Page 1570 ---
Issue
Description
Implementation
Sales returns
and
allowances
Return of product by
customer (e.g., due to
dissatisfaction with the
product) in exchange for
refunds, a credit against
amounts owed or that will
be owed, and/or another
product in exchange.
Seller may recognize (a) a liability
(and an adjustment to revenue for
products expected to be returned),
and (b) an asset (and corresponding
adjustment to cost of goods sold)
for the goods returned from
customers.
Repurchase
agreements
Seller has an obligation or
right to repurchase the asset
at a later date.
Generally, if the company has an
obligation or right to repurchase the
asset for an amount greater than its
selling price, then the transaction is
a financing transaction.
Bill-and-hold
arrangements
Results when the buyer is
not yet ready to take
delivery but does take title
and accepts billing.
Revenue is recognized depending
on when the customer obtains
control of that product.
Principal-
agent
relationships
Arrangement in which the
principal’s performance
obligation is to provide
goods or perform services
for a customer. The agent’s
performance obligation is to
arrange for the principal to
provide these goods or
services to a customer.
Amounts collected on behalf of the
principal are not revenue of the
agent. Instead, revenue for the
agent is the amount of the
commission it receives. The
principal recognizes revenue when
the goods or services are sold to a
third-party customer.
Consignments A principal-agent
relationship in which the
consignor (manufacturer or
wholesaler) ships
merchandise to the
consignee (dealer), who is
to act as an agent for the
consignor in selling the
merchandise.
The consignor recognizes revenue
only after receiving notification of
the sale and the cash remittance
from the consignee (consignor
carries the merchandise as
inventory throughout the
consignment). The consignee
records commission revenue
(usually some percentage of the
selling price).
Warranties
Warranties can be
assurance-type (product
meets agreed-upon
A separate performance obligation
is not recorded for assurance-type
warranties (considered part of the

--- Page 1571 ---
specifications) or service-
type (provides additional
service beyond the
assurance-type warranty).
product). Service-type warranties
are recorded as a separate
performance obligation. Companies
should allocate a portion of the
transaction price to service-type
warranties, when present.
Non-
refundable
upfront fees
Upfront payments generally
relate to initiation,
activation, or setup
activities for a good or
service to be delivered in
the future.
The upfront payment should be
allocated over the periods benefited.
ILLUSTRATION 18.26 Summary—Other Revenue Recognition Issues
Presentation and Disclosure
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Describe presentation and disclosure regarding revenue.
Presentation
Companies use an asset-liability approach to recognize revenue. For example,
when Cereal Partners (CHE) delivers cereal to Carrefour (FRA) (satisfying its
performance obligation), it has a right to consideration from Carrefour and
therefore has a contract asset. If, on the other hand, Carrefour performs first, by
prepaying for this cereal, Cereal Partners has a contract liability. Companies must
present these contract assets and contract liabilities on their statements of
financial position.
Contract Assets and Liabilities
Contract assets are of two types: (1) unconditional rights to receive
consideration because the company has satisfied its performance obligation with
a customer, and (2) conditional rights to receive consideration because the
company has satisfied one performance obligation but must satisfy another
performance obligation in the contract before it can bill the customer. Companies
should report unconditional rights to receive consideration as a receivable on the
statement of financial position. Conditional rights on the statement of financial
position should be reported separately as contract assets. Illustration 18.27
provides an example of the accounting and reporting for a contract asset.

--- Page 1572 ---
Contract Asset
Facts: On January 1, 2022, Finn ASA enters into a contract to transfer Product A
and Product B to Obermine Overstock for €100,000. The contract specifies that
payment for Product A will not occur until Product B is also delivered. In other
words, payment will not occur until both Product A and Product B are
transferred to Obermine. Finn determines that standalone selling prices are
€30,000 for Product A and €70,000 for Product B. Finn delivers Product A to
Obermine on February 1, 2022. On March 1, 2022, Finn delivers Product B to
Obermine.
Question: What journal entries should Finn make regarding to this
contract in 2022?
Solution: No entry is required on January 1, 2022, because neither party has
performed on the contract. On February 1, 2022, Finn records the following
entry.
February 1, 2022
Contract Asset
30,000
Sales Revenue
30,000
On February 1, Finn has satisfied its performance obligation and therefore
reports revenue of €30,000. However, it does not record an accounts
receivable at this point because it does not have an unconditional right to
receive the €100,000 unless it also transfers Product B to Obermine. In other
words, a contract asset occurs generally when a company must satisfy another
performance obligation before it is entitled to bill the customer. When Finn
transfers Product B on March 1, 2022, it makes the following entry.
March 1, 2022
Accounts Receivable 100,000
Contract Asset
30,000
Sales Revenue
70,000
ILLUSTRATION 18.27 Contract Asset Recognition and Presentation
As indicated above, a contract liability is a company’s obligation to transfer
goods or services to a customer for which the company has received
consideration from the customer. A contract liability is generally referred to as

--- Page 1573 ---
Unearned Sales Revenue, Unearned Service Revenue, or another appropriate
account title. Illustration 18.28 provides an example of the recognition and
presentation of a contract liability.
Contract Liability
Facts: On March 1, 2022, Henly Company enters into a contract to transfer a
product to Propel Inc. on July 31, 2022. It is agreed that Propel will pay the full
price of $10,000 in advance on April 15, 2022. Henly delivers the product on July
31, 2022. The cost of the product is $7,500.
Question: What journal entries are required in 2022?
Solution: No entry is required on March 1, 2022, because neither party has
performed on the contract. On receiving the cash on April 15, 2022, Henly
records the following entry.
April 15, 2022
Cash
10,000
Unearned Sales Revenue
10,000
On satisfying the performance obligation on July 31, 2022, Henly records the
following entry to record the sale.
July 31, 2022
Unearned Sales Revenue 10,000
Sales Revenue
10,000
In addition, Henly records cost of goods sold as follows.
Cost of Goods Sold 7,500
Inventory
7,500
ILLUSTRATION 
18.28 
Contract 
Liability 
Recognition 
and
Presentation
Companies are not required to use the terms “contract assets” and “contract
liabilities” on the statement of financial position. For example, contract liabilities
are performance obligations and therefore more descriptive titles (as noted
earlier) such as unearned service revenue, unearned sales revenue, repurchase
liability, and return liability may be used where appropriate. For contract assets,

--- Page 1574 ---
it is important that financial statement users can differentiate between
unconditional and conditional rights through appropriate account presentation.
Contract Modifications
Companies sometimes change the terms of a contract while it is ongoing; this is
referred to as a contract modification. When this occurs, companies
determine whether a new contract (and performance obligations) results or
whether the existing contract is still in effect, but with modifications.
Separate Performance Obligation
A company accounts for a contract modification as a new contract if both of the
following conditions are satisfied:
The promised goods or services are distinct (i.e., the company sells them
separately and they are not interdependent with other goods and services),
and
The company has the right to receive an amount of consideration that
reflects the standalone selling price of the promised goods or services.
[18]
For example, Crandall Co. has a contract to sell 100 products to a customer for
$10,000 ($100 per product) at various points in time over a six-month period.
After 60 products have been delivered, Crandall modifies the contract by
promising to deliver 20 more products for an additional $1,900, or $95 per
product (which is the standalone selling price of the products at the time of the
contract modification). Crandall regularly sells the products separately. In this
situation, the contract modification for the additional 20 products is, in effect, a
new and separate contract because it meets both of the conditions above.
That is, it does not affect the accounting for the original contract.
Given a new contract, Crandall will recognize an additional $4,000 [(100 units −
60 units) × $100] related to the original contract terms and $1,900 (20 units ×
$95) related to the new products. Total revenue after the modification is
therefore $5,900 ($4,000 + $1,900).
Prospective Modification
What if Crandall Co. determines that the additional products are not a separate
performance obligation? This might arise if the new products are not priced at
the proper standalone selling price or if they are not distinct. In this situation,
companies generally account for the modification using a prospective approach.

--- Page 1575 ---
Under the prospective approach, Crandall should account for the effect of the
change in the period of change as well as future periods if the change affects
both. Crandall should not change previously reported results. For Crandall, the
amount recognized as revenue for each of the remaining products would be a
blended price of $98.33, computed as shown in Illustration 18.29.
Consideration for products not yet delivered under original contract
($100 × 40)
$4,000
Consideration for products to be delivered under the contract
modification ($95 × 20)
1,900
Total remaining revenue
$5,900
Revenue per remaining unit ($5,900 ÷ 60) = $98.33
ILLUSTRATION 18.29 Revenue Under Prospective Modification
Under the prospective approach, this computation differs from that in the
separate performance obligation approach because revenue on the remaining
units is recognized at the blended price. Total revenue after the modification is
therefore $5,900 (60 units × $98.33). Illustration 18.30 shows the revenue
reported under the two contract modification approaches for Crandall Co.
Revenue
Recognized Prior
to Modification
Revenue
Recognized After
Modification
Total
Revenue
Recognized
Separate performance
obligation
$6,000
$5,900
$11,900
No separate
performance
obligation—
prospectively
$6,000
$5,900
$11,900
ILLUSTRATION 
18.30 
Comparison 
of 
Contract 
Modification
Approaches
As indicated, whether a modification is treated as a separate performance
obligation or prospectively, the same amount of revenue is recognized before and
after the modification. However, under the prospective approach, a blended price
($98.33) is used for sales in the periods after the modification.15
Costs to Fulfill a Contract
Companies may also report assets associated with fulfillment costs related to a
revenue arrangement. Companies divide fulfillment costs (contract acquisition
costs) into two categories:

--- Page 1576 ---
1. Those that give rise to an asset.
2. Those that are expensed as incurred.
Companies recognize an asset for the incremental costs if these costs are
incurred to obtain a contract with a customer. In other words, incremental costs
are those that a company would not incur if the contract had not been obtained
(e.g., selling commissions). Additional examples that give rise to an asset are as
follows.
a. Direct labor, direct materials, and allocation of costs that relate directly to
the contract (e.g., costs of contract management and supervision, insurance,
and depreciation of tools and equipment).
b. Costs that generate or enhance resources of the company that will be used in
satisfying performance obligations in the future. Such costs include
intangible design or engineering costs that will continue to give rise to
benefits in the future.
Other costs that are expensed as incurred include general and administrative
costs (unless those costs are explicitly chargeable to the customer under the
contract) as well as costs of wasted materials, labor, or other resources to fulfill
the contract that were not reflected in the price of the contract. That is,
companies only capitalize costs that are direct, incremental, and
recoverable (assuming that the contract period is more than one year).
Illustration 18.31 provides an example of costs capitalized to fulfill a contract.
As a practical expedient, a company recognizes the incremental costs of obtaining
a contract as an expense when incurred if the amortization period of the asset
that the company otherwise would have recognized is one year or less.

--- Page 1577 ---
Contract Costs
Facts: Rock Integrators enters into a contract to operate Dello Company’s
information technology data center for 5 years. Rock Integrators incurs selling
commission costs of $10,000 to obtain the contract. Before performing the
services, Rock Integrators designs and builds a technology platform that
interfaces with Dello’s systems. That platform is not transferred to Dello. Dello
promises to pay a fixed fee of $20,000 per month. Rock Integrators incurs the
following additional costs: design services for the platform $40,000, hardware
for the platform $120,000, software $90,000, and testing of data center
$100,000.
Question: What are Rock Integrators’ costs for fulfilling the contract
to Dello Company?
Solution: The $10,000 selling commission costs related to obtaining the
contract are recognized as an asset. The design services cost of $40,000 and
the hardware for the platform of $120,000 are also capitalized. As the
technology platform is independent of the contract, the pattern of
amortization of this platform may not be related to the terms of the contract.
The testing costs are expensed as incurred; in general, these costs are not
recoverable.
ILLUSTRATION 18.31 Recognition—Contract Costs
Collectibility
As indicated earlier, if it is probable that the transaction price will not be
collected, this is an indication that the parties are not committed to their
obligations. As a result, one of the criteria for the existence of a contract is not
met, and therefore revenue is not recognized.
Any time a company sells a product or performs a service on account, a
collectibility issue occurs. Collectibility refers to a customer’s credit risk, that is,
the risk that a customer will be unable to pay the amount of consideration in
accordance with the contract. Under the revenue guidance—as long as a contract
exists (it is probable that the customer will pay)—the amount recognized as
revenue is not adjusted for customer credit risk.
Thus, companies report the revenue gross (without consideration of credit risk)
and then present an allowance for any impairment due to bad debts (recognized
initially and subsequently in accordance with the respective bad debt guidance).

--- Page 1578 ---
An impairment related to bad debts is reported as an operating expense in the
income statement. As a result, whether a company will get paid for satisfying a
performance obligation is not a consideration in determining revenue
recognition. [20]
Disclosure
The disclosure requirements for revenue recognition are designed to help
financial statement users understand the nature, amount, timing, and
uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. To
achieve that objective, companies disclose qualitative and quantitative
information about all of the following:
Contracts with customers. These disclosures include the disaggregation
of revenue, presentation of opening and closing balances in contract assets
and contract liabilities, and significant information related to their
performance obligations.
Significant judgments. These disclosures include judgments and changes
in these judgments that affect the determination of the transaction price, the
allocation of the transaction price, and the determination of the timing of
revenue.
Assets recognized from costs incurred to fulfill a contract. These
disclosures include the closing balances of assets recognized to obtain or
fulfill a contract, the amount of amortization recognized, and the method
used for amortization.
To implement these requirements and meet the disclosure objectives, companies
provide a range of disclosures, as summarized in Illustration 18.32. [21]16

--- Page 1579 ---
Disclosure
Type
Requirements
Disaggregation
of revenue
Disclose disaggregated revenue information in categories that
depict how the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of
revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
Reconcile disaggregated revenue to revenue for reportable
segments.
Reconciliation
of contract
balances
Disclose opening and closing balances of contract assets (e.g.,
unbilled receivables) and liabilities (e.g., deferred revenue) and
provide a qualitative description of significant changes in these
amounts. Disclose the amount of revenue recognized in the
current period relating to performance obligations satisfied in a
prior period (e.g., from contracts with variable consideration).
Disclose the opening and closing balances of trade receivables if
not presented elsewhere.
Remaining
performance
obligations
Disclose the amount of the transaction price allocated to
remaining performance obligations not subject to significant
revenue reversal. Provide a narrative discussion of potential
additional revenue in constrained arrangements.
Costs to obtain
or fulfill
contracts
Disclose the closing balances of capitalized costs to obtain and
fulfill a contract and the amount of amortization in the period.
Disclose the method used to determine amortization for each
reporting period.
Other
qualitative
disclosures
Disclose significant judgments and changes in judgments that
affect the amount and timing of revenue from contracts with
customers. Disclose how management determines the minimum
amount of revenue not subject to the variable consideration
constraint.
ILLUSTRATION 18.32 Revenue Disclosures

--- Page 1580 ---
Evolving Issue
Converged, Converging, or Diverging?
After six years of hard work, the IASB and the FASB were able to create a
converged revenue recognition standard. In fact, at the time of issuance by
both Boards, it was viewed as a significant milestone in the journey to have a
single set of high-quality global accounting standards. In the press release
announcing the issuance of the standard, the IASB chair, Hans Hoogervorst,
said, “The successful conclusion of this project is a major achievement for
both Boards. Together, we have improved the revenue requirements of both
IFRS and U.S. GAAP, while managing to achieve a fully converged standard.
Our attention now turns to ensuring a successful transition to these new
requirements.”
While the result of their work is laudable, there were some differences
between the two standards even at the time of issuance. In addition, since the
standard was issued, both Boards have made several modifications and
interpretations which, in some cases, have actually widened the differences
between the two standards.
The most significant difference at the time of issuance was the meaning of
the word “probable.” Under IFRS, probable is defined to mean “more likely
than not,” which means more than 50 percent likely. Under U.S. GAAP,
probable generally means “likely to occur” and is typically considered to be in
the 75 percent to 80 percent range.
Since the standards were issued, several accounting policy options have been
included in the U.S. standard that have not been included in IFRS. For
example, the U.S. standard provides an accounting policy election to
determine whether shipping services provided by a third party are a separate
performance obligation. IFRS does not provide this election. Further, the U.S.
standard provides that taxes collected from customers (for example, sales
taxes) can be excluded from revenue as an accounting policy elective. IFRS 15
discusses whether taxes should be included in the total amount of revenue
but requires a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction analysis as a final determination.
The licensing of intellectual property is a very challenging area in the
application of revenue recognition. Both in the initial release and in
subsequent modifications, the two standards have diverged in this area. For
example, the U.S. standard contains two categories of intellectual property—
functional and symbolic—whereas these two categories are not present in
IFRS 15.

--- Page 1581 ---
Source: News release, “IASB and FASB Issue Converged Standard on Revenue Recognition”
(Norwalk, CT: Financial Accounting Foundation, May 28, 2014).
APPENDIX 18A
Long-Term Construction Contracts
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Apply the percentage-of-completion method for long-term contracts.
Revenue Recognition over Time
For the most part, companies recognize revenue at the point of sale because that
is when the performance obligation is satisfied. However, as indicated in the
chapter, under certain circumstances companies recognize revenue over time.
The most notable context in which revenue is recognized over time is long-term
construction contract accounting.
Long-term contracts frequently provide that the seller (builder) may bill the
purchaser at intervals, as it reaches various points in the project. Examples of
long-term contracts are construction-type contracts, development of military and
commercial aircraft, weapons-delivery systems, and space exploration hardware.
When the project consists of separable units, such as a group of buildings or
miles of roadway, contract provisions may provide for delivery in installments. In
that case, the seller would bill the buyer and transfer title at stated stages of
completion, such as the completion of each building unit or every 10 miles of
road. The accounting records should record sales when installments are
“delivered.”
A company satisfies a performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time if
at least one of the following three criteria is met: [22]
1. The customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the
seller’s performance as the seller performs.
2. The company’s performance creates or enhances an asset (for example, work
in process) that the customer controls as the asset is created or enhanced; or
3. The company’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use.
For example, the asset cannot be used by another customer. In addition to
this alternative use element, at least one of the following criteria must be
met:

--- Page 1582 ---
a. Another company would not need to substantially re-perform the work
the company has completed to date if that other company were to fulfill
the remaining obligation to the customer.
b. The company has a right to payment for its performance completed to
date, and it expects to fulfill the contract as promised.17
Therefore, if criterion 1, 2, or 3 is met, then a company recognizes revenue over
time if it can reasonably estimate its progress toward satisfaction of the
performance obligations. That is, it recognizes revenues and gross profits
each period based upon the progress of the construction—referred to as the
percentage-of-completion method. The company accumulates construction
costs plus gross profit recognized to date in an inventory account (Construction
in Process), and it accumulates progress billings in a contra inventory account
(Billings on Construction in Process).
The rationale for using percentage-of-completion accounting is that under most
of these contracts the buyer and seller have enforceable rights. The buyer has the
legal right to require specific performance on the contract. The seller has the
right to require progress payments that provide evidence of the buyer’s
ownership interest. As a result, a continuous sale occurs as the work progresses.
Companies should recognize revenue according to that progression.
Alternatively, if the criteria for recognition over time are not met, the company
recognizes revenues and gross profit at a point in time, that is, when the contract
is completed. In these cases, contract revenue is recognized only to the extent of
costs incurred that are expected to be recoverable. Once all costs are recognized,
profit is recognized. This approach is referred to as the cost-recovery (zero-
profit) method. The company accumulates construction costs in an inventory
account (Construction in Process), and it accumulates progress billings in a
contra inventory account (Billings on Construction in Process).
Percentage-of-Completion Method
The percentage-of-completion method recognizes revenues, costs, and gross
profit as a company makes progress toward completion on a long-term contract.
To defer recognition of these items until completion of the entire contract is to
misrepresent the efforts (costs) and accomplishments (revenues) of the
accounting periods during the contract. In order to apply the percentage-of-
completion method, a company must have some basis or standard for measuring
the progress toward completion at particular interim dates.
Measuring the Progress Toward Completion

--- Page 1583 ---
As one practicing accountant wrote, “The big problem in applying the percentage-
of-completion method … has to do with the ability to make reasonably accurate
estimates of completion and the final gross profit.” Companies use various
methods to determine the extent of progress toward completion. The most
common are the cost-to-cost and units-of-delivery methods.
As indicated in the chapter, the objective of all these methods is to measure the
extent of progress in terms of costs, units, or value added. Companies identify the
various measures (costs incurred, labor hours worked, tons produced, floors
completed, etc.) and classify them as input or output measures. Input
measures (costs incurred, labor hours worked) are efforts devoted to a contract.
Output measures (with units of delivery measured as tons produced, floors of a
building completed, miles of a highway completed) track results. Neither
measure is universally applicable to all long-term projects. Their use requires the
exercise of judgment and careful tailoring to the circumstances.
Both input and output measures have certain disadvantages. The input measure
is based on an established relationship between a unit of input and productivity.
If inefficiencies cause the productivity relationship to change, inaccurate
measurements result. Another potential problem is front-end loading, in which
significant upfront costs result in higher estimates of completion. To avoid this
problem, companies should disregard some early-stage construction costs—for
example, costs of uninstalled materials or costs of subcontracts not yet
performed—if they do not relate to contract performance.
Similarly, output measures can produce inaccurate results if the units used are
not comparable in time, effort, or cost to complete. For example, using floors
(stories) completed can be deceiving. Completing the first floor of an eight-story
building may require more than one-eighth the total cost because of the
substructure and foundation construction.
The most popular input measure used to determine the progress toward
completion is the cost-to-cost basis. Under this basis, a company like Ultra
Electronics Holdings (GBR) measures the percentage of completion by
comparing costs incurred to date with the most recent estimate of the total costs
required to complete the contract. Illustration 18A.1 shows the formula for the
cost-to-cost basis.
Costs Incurred to Date
= Percent Complete
Most Recent Estimate of Total Costs
ILLUSTRATION 18A.1 Formula for Percentage-of-Completion, Cost-
to-Cost Basis

--- Page 1584 ---
Once Ultra Electronics Holdings knows the percentage that costs incurred bear to
total estimated costs, it applies that percentage to the total revenue or the
estimated total gross profit on the contract. The resulting amount is the revenue
or the gross profit to be recognized to date. Illustration 18A.2 shows this
computation.
Percent
Complete ×
Estimated
Total Revenue
(or Gross Profit)
=
Revenue (or Gross 
Profit) to Be 
Recognized to Date
ILLUSTRATION 18A.2 Formula for Total Revenue (or Gross Profit)
to Be Recognized to Date
To find the amounts of revenue and gross profit recognized each period, Ultra
Electronics Holdings subtracts total revenue or gross profit recognized in prior
periods, as shown in Illustration 18A.3.
Revenue (or Gross
Profit) to Be
Recognized to Date
−
Revenue (or Gross
Profit) Recognized
in Prior Periods
=
Current-Period 
Revenue
(or Gross Profit)
ILLUSTRATION 18A.3 Formula for Amount of Current-Period
Revenue (or Gross Profit) Cost-to-Cost Basis
Because the cost-to-cost method is widely used (without excluding other
bases for measuring progress toward completion), we have adopted it for use in
our examples.
Example of Percentage-of-Completion Method—Cost-to-Cost Basis
To illustrate the percentage-of-completion method, assume that Hardhat
Construction has a contract to construct a £4,500,000 bridge at an estimated cost
of £4,000,000. The contract starts in July 2022, and the bridge is to be completed
in October 2024. The following data pertain to the construction period. (Note that
by the end of 2023, Hardhat has revised the estimated total cost from £4,000,000
to £4,050,000.)
2022
2023
2024
Costs to date
£1,000,000 £2,916,000 £4,050,000
Estimated costs to complete
3,000,000
1,134,000
—
Progress billings during the year
900,000 2,400,000
1,200,000
Cash collected during the year
750,000
1,750,000
2,000,000
Hardhat would compute the percent complete as shown in Illustration 18A.4.

--- Page 1585 ---
2022
2023
2024
Contract price
£4,500,000
£4,500,000
£ 4,500,000
Less estimated cost:
Costs to date
1,000,000
2,916,000
4,050,000
Estimated costs to
complete
3,000,000
1,134,000
—
Estimated total costs
4,000,000
4,050,000
4,050,000
Estimated total gross
profit
£ 500,000
£ 450,000
£ 450,000
Percent complete
25%
72%
100%
(
) (
) (
)
ILLUSTRATION 18A.4 Application of Percentage-of-Completion
Method, Cost-to-Cost Basis
On the basis of the data above, Hardhat would make the following entries to
record (1) the costs of construction, (2) progress billings, and (3) collections.
These entries appear as summaries of the many transactions that would be
entered individually as they occur during the year.
£1,000,000
£4,000,000
£2,916,000
£4,050,000
£40,050,00
£4,050,000

--- Page 1586 ---
2022
2023
2024
To record
costs of
construction:
Construction
in Process
1,000,000
1,916,000
1,134,000
Materials,
Cash,
Payables,
etc.
1,000,000
1,916,000
1,134,000
To record
progress
billings:
Accounts
Receivable
900,000
2,400,000
1,200,000
Billings on
Construction
in Process
900,000
2,400,000
1,200,000
To record
collections:
Cash
750,000
1,750,000
2,000,000
Accounts
Receivable
750,000
1,750,000
2,000,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.5 Journal Entries—Percentage-of-Completion
Method, Cost-to-Cost Basis
In this example, the costs incurred to date are a measure of the extent of progress
toward completion. To determine this, Hardhat evaluates the costs incurred to
date as a proportion of the estimated total costs to be incurred on the project. The
estimated revenue and gross profit that Hardhat will recognize for each year are
calculated as shown in Illustration 18A.6.

--- Page 1587 ---
To Date
Recognized in 
Prior Years
Recognized in 
Current Year
2022
Revenues (£4,500,000 × .25)
£1,125,000
£1,125,000
Costs
1,000,000
1,000,000
Gross profit
£ 125,000
£ 125,000
2023
Revenues (£4,500,000 × .72)
£3,240,000
£1,125,000
£2,115,000
Costs
2,916,000
1,000,000
1,916,000
Gross profit
£ 324,000
£ 125,000
£ 199,000
2024
Revenues (£4,500,000 × 1.00) £4,500,000
£3,240,000
£1,260,000
Costs
4,050,000
2,916,000
1,134,000
Gross profit
£ 450,000
£ 324,000
£ 126,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.6 Percentage-of-Completion Revenue, Costs,
and Gross Profit by Year
Illustration 18A.7 shows Hardhat’s entries to recognize revenue and gross
profit each year and to record completion and final approval of the contract.

--- Page 1588 ---
2022
2023
2024
To recognize
revenue and
gross profit:
Construction in
Process (gross
profit)
125,000
199,000
126,000
Construction
Expenses
1,000,000
1,916,000
1,134,000
Revenue from
Long-Term
Contracts
1,125,000
2,115,000
1,260,000
To record
completion of
the contract:
Billings on
Construction in
Process
4,500,000
Construction
in Process
4,500,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.7 Journal Entries to Recognize Revenue and
Gross Profit and to Record Contract Completion—Percentage-of-
Completion Method, Cost-to-Cost Basis
Note that Hardhat debits gross profit (as computed in Illustration
18A.6) to Construction in Process. Similarly, it credits Revenue from Long-
Term Contracts for the amounts computed in Illustration 18A.6. Hardhat then
debits the difference between the amounts recognized each year for revenue and
gross profit to a nominal account, Construction Expenses (similar to Cost of
Goods Sold in a manufacturing company). It reports that amount in the income
statement as the actual cost of construction incurred in that period. For example,
in 2022 Hardhat uses the actual costs of £1,000,000 to compute both the gross
profit of £125,000 and the percent complete (25 percent).
Hardhat continues to accumulate costs in the Construction in Process account, in
order to maintain a record of total costs incurred (plus recognized gross profit) to
date. Although theoretically a series of “sales” takes place using the percentage-
of-completion method, the selling company cannot remove the inventory cost
until the construction is completed and transferred to the new owner. Hardhat’s
Construction in Process account for the bridge would include the summarized

--- Page 1589 ---
entries over the term of the construction project as shown in Illustration
18A.8.
Construction in Process
2022 construction costs
£1,000,000 12/31/24 to close
completed
project
2022 recognized gross profit
125,000
2023 construction costs
1,916,000
£4,500,000
2023 recognized gross profit
199,000
2024 construction costs
1,134,000
2024 recognized gross profit
126,000
Total
£4,500,000
Total
£4,500,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.8 Content of Construction in Process Account—
Percentage-of-Completion Method
Recall that the Hardhat Construction example contained a change in estimated
costs: In the second year, 2023, it increased the estimated total costs from
£4,000,000 to £4,050,000. The change in estimate is accounted for in a
cumulative catch-up manner, as indicated in the chapter. This is done by first
adjusting the percent completed to the new estimate of total costs. Next, Hardhat
deducts the amount of revenues and gross profit recognized in prior periods from
revenues and gross profit computed for progress to date. That is, it accounts for
the change in estimate in the period of change. That way, the statement of
financial position at the end of the period of change and the accounting in
subsequent periods are as they would have been if the revised estimate had been
the original estimate.
Financial Statement Presentation—Percentage-of-Completion
Generally, when a company records a receivable from a sale, it reduces the
Inventory account. Under the percentage-of-completion method, however, the
company continues to carry both the receivable and the inventory. Subtracting
the balance in the Billings account from Construction in Process avoids
double-counting the inventory. During the life of the contract, Hardhat reports in
the statement of financial position the difference between the Construction in
Process and the Billings on Construction in Process accounts. If that amount is a
debit, Hardhat reports it as a current asset; if it is a credit, it reports it as a
current liability.
At times, the costs incurred plus the gross profit recognized to date (the balance
in Construction in Process) exceed the billings. In that case, Hardhat reports this
excess as a current asset entitled “Costs and recognized profit in excess of

--- Page 1590 ---
billings.” Hardhat can at any time calculate the unbilled portion of revenue
recognized to date by subtracting the billings to date from the revenue recognized
to date, as illustrated for 2022 for Hardhat Construction in Illustration 18A.9.
Contract revenue recognized to date: £4,500,000 ×
£1,000,000 £1,125,000
£4,000,000
Billings to date
(900,000)
Unbilled revenue
£ 225,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.9 Computation of Unbilled Contract Price at
12/31/22
At other times, the billings exceed costs incurred and gross profit to date. In that
case, Hardhat reports this excess as a current liability entitled “Billings in excess
of costs and recognized profit.”
What happens, as is usually the case, when companies have more than one
project going at a time? When a company has a number of projects, costs exceed
billings on some contracts and billings exceed costs on others. In such a case, the
company segregates the contracts. The asset side includes only those contracts on
which costs and recognized profit exceed billings. The liability side includes only
those on which billings exceed costs and recognized profit. Separate disclosures
of the volume of billings and costs are preferable to a summary presentation of
the net difference.
Using data from the bridge example, Hardhat Construction would report the
status and results of its long-term construction activities in 2022 under the
percentage-of-completion method as shown in Illustration 18A.10.

--- Page 1591 ---
Hardhat Construction
Income Statement (from Illustration 18A.6)
2022
Revenue from long-term contracts
£1,125,000
Costs of construction
1,000,000
Gross profit
£ 125,000
Statement of Financial Position (12/31)
2022
Current assets
Inventory
Construction in process
£1,125,000
Less: Billings
900,000
Costs and recognized profit in excess of billings
£225,000
Accounts receivable (£900,000 − £750,000)
150,000
ILLUSTRATION 
18A.10 
Financial 
Statement 
Presentation—
Percentage-of-Completion Method (2022)
In 2023, its financial statement presentation is as shown in Illustration 18A.11.
Hardhat Construction
Income Statement (from Illustration 18A.6)
2023
Revenue from long-term contracts
£2,115,000
Costs of construction
1,916,000
Gross profit
£ 199,000
Statement of Financial Position (12/31)
2023
Current assets
Accounts receivable (£150,000 + £2,400,000 −
£1,750,000)
£
800,000
Current liabilities
Billings
£3,300,000
Less: Construction in process
3,240,000
Billings in excess of costs and recognized profit
60,000
ILLUSTRATION 
18A.11 
Financial 
Statement 
Presentation—
Percentage-of-Completion Method (2023)

--- Page 1592 ---
In 2024, Hardhat’s financial statements only include an income statement
because the bridge project was completed and settled as shown in Illustration
18A.12.
Hardhat Construction
Income Statement (from Illustration 18A.6)
2024
Revenue from long-term contracts
£1,260,000
Costs of construction
1,134,000
Gross profit
£ 126,000
ILLUSTRATION 
18A.12 
Financial 
Statement 
Presentation—
Percentage-of-Completion Method (2024)
In addition, Hardhat should disclose the information shown in Illustration
18A.13 each year.
Note 1. Summary of significant accounting policies.
Long-Term Construction Contracts. The company recognizes revenues and
reports profits from long-term construction contracts, its principal business,
under the percentage-of-completion method of accounting. These contracts
generally extend for periods in excess of one year. The amounts of revenues and
profits recognized each year are based on the ratio of costs incurred to the total
estimated costs. Costs included in construction in process include direct
materials, direct labor, and project-related overhead. Corporate general and
administrative expenses are charged to the periods as incurred and are not
allocated to construction contracts.
ILLUSTRATION 18A.13 Percentage-of-Completion Method Note
Disclosure
Cost-Recovery (Zero-Profit) Method
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Apply the cost-recovery method for long-term contracts.
During the early stages of a contract, a company like Alcatel-Lucent
Enterprise (FRA) may not be able to estimate reliably the outcome of a long-
term construction contract. Nevertheless, Alcatel-Lucent Enterprise is confident
that it will recover the contract costs incurred. In this case, Alcatel-Lucent
Enterprise uses the cost-recovery (zero-profit) method. This method

--- Page 1593 ---
recognizes revenue only to the extent of costs incurred that are expected to be
recoverable. Only after all costs are incurred is gross profit recognized.
To illustrate the cost-recovery method for the bridge project illustrated on the
preceding pages, Hardhat Construction would report the following revenues and
costs for 2022–2024, as shown in Illustration 18A.14.
To Date
Recognized in
Prior Years
Recognized in
Current Year
2022
Revenues (costs incurred)
£1,000,000
£1,000,000
Costs
1,000,000
1,000,000
Gross profit
£
0
£
0
2023
Revenues (costs incurred)
£2,916,000
£1,000,000
£1,916,000
Costs
2,916,000
1,000,000
1,916,000
Gross profit
£
0
£
0
£
0
2024
Revenues (£4,500,000 × 1.00) £4,500,000
£2,916,000
£1,584,000
Costs
4,050,000
2,916,000
1,134,000
Gross profit
£ 450,000
£
0
£ 450,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.14 Cost-Recovery Method Revenue, Costs, and
Gross Profit by Year
Illustration 18A.15 shows Hardhat’s entries to recognize revenue and gross
profit each year and to record completion and final approval of the contract.

--- Page 1594 ---
2022
2023
2024
Construction
Expenses
1,000,000
1,916,000
Revenue
from Long-
Term
Contracts
1,000,000
1,916,000
(To
recognize
costs and
related
expenses)
Construction in
Process (Gross
Profit)
450,000
Construction
Expenses
1,134,000
Revenue
from Long-
Term
Contracts
1,584,000
(To
recognize
costs and
related
expenses)
Billings on
Construction in
Process
4,500,000
Construction
in Process
4,500,000
(To record
completion
of the
contract)
ILLUSTRATION 18A.15 Journal Entries—Cost-Recovery Method
As indicated, no gross profit is recognized in 2022 and 2023. In 2024, Hardhat
then recognizes gross profit and closes the Billings and Construction in Process

--- Page 1595 ---
accounts.
Illustration 18A.16 compares the amount of gross profit that Hardhat
Construction would recognize for the bridge project under the two revenue
recognition methods.
Percentage-of-Completion Cost-Recovery
2022
£125,000
£
0
2023
199,000
0
2024
126,000
450,000
ILLUSTRATION 18A.16 Comparison of Gross Profit Recognized
under Different Methods
Under the cost-recovery method, Hardhat Construction would report its long-
term construction activities as shown in Illustration 18A.17.

--- Page 1596 ---
Hardhat Construction
Income Statement
2022
2023
2024
Revenue from long-term contracts £1,000,000 £1,916,000 £1,584,000
Costs of construction
1,000,000
1,916,000
1,134,000
Gross profit
£
0 £
0 £  450,000
Statement of Financial Position
(12/31)
2022
2023
2024
Current assets
Inventories
Construction in process
£1,000,000
Less: Billings
900,000
Costs in excess of billings
£
100,000
£ –
0–
Accounts receivable
150,000
£
800,000
–
0–
Current liabilities
Billings
£3,300,000
Less: Construction in process
2,916,000
Billings in excess of costs and recognized
profits
£
384,000
£ –
0–
Note 1. Summary of significant accounting policies.
Long-Term Construction Contracts. The company recognizes revenues and
reports profits from long-term construction contracts, its principal business,
under the cost-recovery method. These contracts generally extend for periods in
excess of one year. Contract costs and billings are accumulated during the
periods of construction, and revenues are recognized only to the extent of costs
incurred that are expected to be recoverable. Only after all costs are incurred is
net income recognized. Costs included in construction in process include direct
material, direct labor, and project-related overhead. Corporate general and
administrative expenses are charged to the periods as incurred.
ILLUSTRATION 18A.17 Financial Statement Presentation—Cost-
Recovery Method
Long-Term Contract Losses

--- Page 1597 ---
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *7
Identify the proper accounting for losses on long-term contracts.
Two types of losses can become evident under long-term contracts:
1. Loss in the current period on a profitable contract. This condition
arises when, during construction, there is a significant increase in the
estimated total contract costs but the increase does not eliminate all profit
on the contract. Under the percentage-of-completion method only, the
estimated cost increase requires a current-period adjustment of excess gross
profit recognized on the project in prior periods. The company records this
adjustment as a loss in the current period because it is a change in
accounting estimate (discussed in Chapter 22).
2. Loss on an unprofitable contract. Cost estimates at the end of the
current period may indicate that a loss will result on completion of the entire
contract. Under both the percentage-of-completion and the cost-recovery
methods, the company must recognize in the current period the entire
expected contract loss.
The treatment described for unprofitable contracts is consistent with the
accounting custom of anticipating foreseeable losses to avoid overstatement of
current and future income (conservatism).18
Loss in Current Period
To illustrate a loss in the current period on a contract expected to be profitable
upon completion, we’ll continue with the Hardhat Construction bridge project.
Assume that on December 31, 2023, Hardhat estimates the costs to complete the
bridge contract at £1,468,962 instead of £1,134,000. Assuming all other data are
the same as before, Hardhat would compute the percentage complete and
recognize the loss as shown in Illustration 18A.18. Compare these
computations with those for 2023 in Illustration 18A.4. The “percent complete”
has dropped, from 72 percent to 66½ percent, due to the increase in estimated
future costs to complete the contract.

--- Page 1598 ---
Cost to date (12/31/23)
£2,916,000
Estimated costs to complete (revised)
1,468,962
Estimated total costs
£4,384,962
Percent complete (£2,916,000 ÷ £4,384,962)
661⁄2%
Revenue recognized in 2023 (£4,500,000 × .665) − £1,125,000 £1,867,500
Costs incurred in 2023
1,916,000
Loss recognized in 2023
£  (48,500)
ILLUSTRATION 18A.18 Computation of Recognizable Loss, 2023—
Loss in Current Period
The 2023 loss of £48,500 is a cumulative adjustment of the “excessive” gross
profit recognized on the contract in 2022. Instead of restating the prior period,
the company absorbs the prior period misstatement entirely in the current
period. In this illustration, the adjustment was large enough to result in
recognition of a loss.
Hardhat Construction would record the loss in 2023 as follows.
Construction Expenses
1,916,000
Construction in Process (loss)
48,500
Revenue from Long-Term Contracts
1,867,500
Hardhat will report the loss of £48,500 on the 2023 income statement as the
difference between the reported revenue of £1,867,500 and the costs of
£1,916,000.19 Under the cost-recovery method, the company does not
recognize a loss in 2023. Why not? Because the company still expects the
contract to result in a profit, to be recognized in the year of completion.
Loss on an Unprofitable Contract
To illustrate the accounting for an overall loss on a long-term contract,
assume that at December 31, 2023, Hardhat Construction estimates the costs to
complete the bridge contract at £1,640,250 instead of £1,134,000. Revised
estimates for the bridge contract are as follows.
2022
2023
Original 
Estimates
Revised
Estimates
Contract price
£4,500,000
£4,500,000
Estimated total cost
4,000,000
4,556,250*

--- Page 1599 ---
Estimated gross profit
£  500,000
Estimated loss
£  (56,250)
*(£2,916,000 + £1,640,250)
Under the percentage-of-completion method, Hardhat recognized
£125,000 of gross profit in 2022 (see Illustration 18A.18). This amount must be
offset in 2023 because it is no longer expected to be realized. In addition, since
losses must be recognized as soon as estimable, the company must recognize the
total estimated loss of £56,250 in 2023. Therefore, Hardhat must recognize a
total loss of £181,250 (£125,000 + £56,250) in 2023.
Illustration 18A.19 shows Hardhat’s computation of the revenue to be
recognized in 2023.
Revenue recognized in 2023:
Contract price
£4,500,000
Percent complete
×
.64*
Revenue recognizable to date
2,880,000
Less: Revenue recognized prior to 2023
1,125,000
Revenue recognized in 2023
£1,755,000
*Cost to date (12/31/23)
£2,916,000
Estimated cost to complete
1,640,250
Estimated total costs
£4,556,250
Percent complete: £2,916,000 ÷ £4,556,250 = 64%
ILLUSTRATION 18A.19 Computation of Revenue Recognizable, 2023
—Unprofitable Contract
To compute the construction costs to be expensed in 2023, Hardhat adds the total
loss to be recognized in 2023 (£125,000 + £56,250) to the revenue to be
recognized in 2023. Illustration 18A.20 shows this computation.
Revenue recognized in 2023 (computed above)
£1,755,000
Total loss recognized in 2023:
Reversal of 2022 gross profit
£125,000
Total estimated loss on the contract
56,250
181,250
Construction cost expensed in 2023
£1,936,250
ILLUSTRATION 18A.20 Computation of Construction Expense, 2023
—Unprofitable Contract

--- Page 1600 ---
Hardhat Construction would record the long-term contract revenues, expenses,
and loss in 2023 as follows.
Construction Expenses
1,936,250
Construction in Process (loss)
181,250
Revenue from Long-Term Contracts
1,755,000
At the end of 2023, Construction in Process has a balance of £2,859,750 as shown
in Illustration 18A.21.20
Construction in Process
2022 Construction costs
1,000,000
2022 Recognized gross profit
125,000
2023 Construction costs
1,916,000 2023 Recognized loss 181,250
Balance
2,859,750
ILLUSTRATION 18A.21 Content of Construction in Process Account
at End of 2023—Unprofitable Contract
Under the cost-recovery method, Hardhat also would recognize the contract
loss of £56,250 through the following entry in 2023 (the year in which the loss
first became evident).
Loss from Long-Term Contracts 56,250
Construction in Process (loss)
56,250
Just as the Billings account balance cannot exceed the contract price, neither can
the balance in Construction in Process exceed the contract price. In
circumstances where the Construction in Process balance exceeds the billings,
the company can deduct the recognized loss from such accumulated costs on the
statement of financial position. That is, under both the percentage-of-completion
and the cost-recovery methods, the provision for the loss (the credit) may be
combined with Construction in Process, thereby reducing the inventory balance.
In those circumstances, however (as in the 2023 example above), where the
billings exceed the accumulated costs, Hardhat must report separately on the
statement of financial position, as a current liability, the amount of the estimated
loss. Under both the percentage-of-completion and the cost-recovery methods,
Hardhat would take the £56,250 loss, as estimated in 2023, from the
Construction in Process account and report it separately as a current liability
titled “Estimated liability from long-term contracts.”

--- Page 1601 ---
APPENDIX 18B
Revenue Recognition for Franchises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *8
Explain revenue recognition for franchises.
In this appendix, we cover a common yet unique type of business transaction—
franchises. As indicated throughout this chapter, companies recognize revenue
when performance obligations in a revenue arrangement are satisfied.
Franchises represent a challenging area because a variety of performance
obligations may exist in a given franchise agreement. As a result, companies must
carefully analyze franchise agreements to identify the separate performance
obligations, determine when performance obligations are met, and, therefore,
when revenue should be recognized.21
Four types of franchising arrangements have evolved: (1) manufacturer-retailer,
(2) manufacturer-wholesaler, (3) service sponsor–retailer, and (4) wholesaler-
retailer. The fastest-growing category of franchising, and the one that has given
rise to accounting challenges, is the third category, service sponsor–retailer.
Included in this category are such industries and businesses as:
Soft ice cream/frozen yogurt stores (Snowflake Gelato, FROZ, TCBY,
Dairy Queen)
Food drive-ins (Quick, Nordsee, McDonald’s, KFC)
Restaurants (La Boucherie, Mitchells and Butlers, Pizza Hut)
Motels (Steinberger, Radisson, Marriott)
Auto rentals (Europcar, Hertz, Avis)
Others (Body Shop, Sport 2000, Swatch, EuroSPAR, 7-Eleven
Stores)
Franchise companies derive their revenue from one or both of two sources: (1)
from the sale of initial franchises and related assets or services, and (2) from
continuing fees based on the operations of franchises. The franchisor (the party
who grants business rights under the franchise) normally provides the
franchisee (the party who operates the franchised business) with the following
services.
1. Assistance in site selection: (a) analyzing location and (b) negotiating lease.
2. Evaluation of potential income.

--- Page 1602 ---
3. Supervision of construction activity: (a) obtaining financing, (b) designing
building, and (c) supervising contractor while building.
4. Assistance in the acquisition of signs, fixtures, and equipment.
5. Bookkeeping and advisory services: (a) setting up franchisee’s records; (b)
advising on income, real estate, and other taxes; and (c) advising on local
regulations of the franchisee’s business.
6. Employee and management training.
7. Quality control.
8. Advertising and promotion.
In the past, it was standard practice for franchisors to recognize the entire
franchise fee at the date of sale, whether the fee was received then or was
collectible over a long period of time. Frequently, franchisors recorded the entire
amount as revenue in the year of sale, even though many of the services were yet
to be performed and uncertainty existed regarding the collection of the entire fee.
(In effect, the franchisors were counting their fried chickens before they were
hatched.) However, a franchise agreement may provide for refunds to the
franchisee if certain conditions are not met, and franchise fee profit can be
reduced sharply by future costs of obligations and services to be rendered by the
franchisor.
Franchise Accounting
As indicated, the performance obligations in a franchise arrangement relate to
the right to open a business, use of the trade name or other intellectual property
of the franchisor, and continuing services, such as marketing help, training, and
in some cases supplying inventory and inventory management. Franchisors
commonly charge an initial franchise fee as well as continuing franchise fees. The
initial franchise fee is payment for establishing the franchise relationship and
providing some initial services. Continuing franchise fees are received in
return for the continuing rights granted by the franchise agreement and for
providing such services as management training, advertising and promotion, legal
assistance, and other support. Illustration 18B.1 provides an example of a
franchise arrangement.

--- Page 1603 ---
Franchise
Facts: Tum’s Pizza Inc. enters into a franchise agreement on December 31, 2022,
giving Food Fight Corp. the right to operate as a franchisee of Tum’s Pizza for 5
years. Tum’s charges Food Fight an initial franchise fee of $50,000 for the right
to operate as a franchisee. Of this amount, $20,000 is payable when Food Fight
signs the agreement, and the note balance is payable in five annual payments of
$6,000 each on December 31. As part of the arrangement, Tum’s helps locate the
site, negotiate the lease or purchase of the site, supervise the construction
activity, and provide employee training and the equipment. Similar training
services and equipment are sold separately.
Food Fight also promises to pay ongoing royalty payments of 1% of its annual
sales (payable each January 31 of the following year) and is obliged to purchase
products from Tum’s at its current standalone selling prices at the time of
purchase. The credit rating of Food Fight indicates that money can be borrowed
at 8%. The present value of an ordinary annuity of five annual receipts of
$6,000, each discounted at 8%, is $23,957. The discount of $6,043 represents
the interest revenue to be accrued by Tum’s over the payment period.
Question: What are the performance obligations in this arrangement
and the point in time at which the performance obligations for Tum’s
are satisfied and revenue is recognized?
Solution: To identify the performance obligations, Tum’s must determine
whether the promised rights, site selection and construction services, training
services, and equipment are distinct.
Rights to the trade name, market area, and proprietary know-how for 5
years are not individually distinct because they are not sold separately and
cannot be used with other goods or services that are readily available to
the franchisee. Therefore, those combined rights give rise to a single
performance obligation. Tum’s satisfies the performance obligation to
grant those rights at the point in time when Food Fight obtains control of
the rights. That is, once Food Fight begins operating the store, Tum’s has
no further obligation with respect to these rights.
Training services and equipment are distinct because similar services and
equipment are sold separately. Tum’s satisfies those performance
obligations when it transfers the services and equipment to Food Fight.
Tum’s cannot recognize revenue for the royalty payments because it is not
reasonably assured to be entitled to those sales-based royalty amounts.

--- Page 1604 ---
That is, these payments represent variable consideration. Therefore,
Tum’s recognizes revenue for the royalties when (or as) the uncertainty is
resolved.
Tum’s promise to stand ready to provide products to the franchisee in the
future at standalone selling prices is not accounted for as a separate
performance obligation in the contract because it does not provide Food Fight
with a material right. Thus, revenue from those sales is recorded in the future
when the sales are made.
ILLUSTRATION 18B.1 Recognition—Franchise Arrangement
To illustrate the accounting for this franchise, consider the following values for
allocation of the transaction price at December 31, 2022.
Rights to the trade name, market area, and proprietary know-how $20,000
Training services
9,957
Equipment (cost of $10,000)
14,000
Total transaction price
$43,957
Training is completed in January 2023, the equipment is installed in January
2023, and Food Fight holds a grand opening on February 2, 2023. The entries for
the Tum’s franchise arrangement are summarized in Illustration 18B.2.

--- Page 1605 ---
ILLUSTRATION 
18B.2 
Franchise 
Entries—Inception 
and
Commencement of Operations
As indicated, when Food Fight begins operations, Tum’s satisfies the
performance obligations related to the franchise rights, training, and equipment
under the franchise agreement. That is, Tum’s has no further obligations related
to these elements of the franchise.
During 2023, Food Fight does well, recording $525,000 of sales in its first year of
operations. The entries for Tum’s related to the first year of operations of the
franchise are summarized in Illustration 18B.3.
ILLUSTRATION 18B.3 Franchise Entries—First Year of Franchise
Operations
Tum’s will make similar entries in subsequent years of the franchise agreement.

--- Page 1606 ---
Recognition of Franchise Rights Revenue over Time
In the franchise example presented in Illustration 18B.1, Tum’s transferred
control of the franchise rights at a point in time—that is, when the franchisee
began operations and could benefit from control of the rights—with no further
involvement by Tum’s. In other situations, depending on the economic substance
of the rights, the franchisor may be providing access to the right rather than
transferring control of the franchise rights. In this case, the franchise revenue
is recognized over time, rather than at a point in time. The franchise
arrangement presented in Illustration 18B.4 provides an example of a
franchise agreement with revenue recognized over time.

--- Page 1607 ---
Franchise Revenue over Time
Facts: Tech Solvers Corp. is a franchisor in the emerging technology consulting
service business. Tech Solvers’ stores provide a range of computing services
(hardware/software installation, repairs, data backup, device syncing, and
network solutions) on popular Apple and PC devices. Each franchise agreement
gives a franchisee the right to open a Tech Solvers store and sell Tech Solvers’
products and services in the area for 5 years. Under the contract, Tech Solvers
also provides the franchisee with a number of services to support and enhance
the franchise brand, including (a) advising and consulting on the operations of
the store; (b) communicating new hardware and software developments, and
service techniques; (c) providing business and training manuals; and (d)
providing advertising programs and training. Largely a service operation (all
parts and other supplies are purchased as needed by customers), Tech Solvers
provides few upfront services to franchisees. Instead, the franchisee recruits
service technicians, who are given Tech Solvers’ training materials (online
manuals and tutorials), which are updated for technology changes on a monthly
basis at a minimum.
Tech Solvers enters into a franchise agreement on December 15, 2022, giving a
franchisee the rights to operate a Tech Solvers franchise for 5 years. Tech
Solvers charges an initial franchise fee of $5,000 for the right to operate as a
franchisee, payable upon signing the contract. Tech Solvers also receives
ongoing royalty payments of 7% of the franchisee’s annual sales (payable each
January 15 of the following year). The franchise begins operations in January
2023 and recognizes $85,000 of revenue in 2023.
Question: What are the performance obligations in this arrangement
and the point in time at which the performance obligations will be
satisfied and revenue will be recognized?
Solution: To identify the performance obligations, Tech Solvers must
determine whether the promised rights and the ongoing franchisee technology
support and training services are distinct.
Rights to the trade name, market area, and proprietary know-how for 5
years are not individually distinct because they are not sold separately and
cannot be used with other goods or services that are readily available to
the franchisee. In addition, these licensed rights have a close connection
with the underlying Tech Solvers’ intellectual property (its ability to keep
its service and training materials up-to-date). Therefore, those combined
rights and the ongoing training materials are a single performance

--- Page 1608 ---
obligation. Tech Solvers satisfies the performance obligation over time.
That is, once the franchisee begins operating a Tech Solvers franchise,
Tech Solvers is providing access to the rights and must continue to
perform updates and services.
Tech Solvers cannot recognize revenue for the royalty payments because
it is not reasonably assured to be entitled to those revenue-based royalty
amounts. That is, these payments represent variable consideration.
Therefore, Tech Solvers recognizes revenue for the royalties when (or as)
the uncertainty is resolved.
ILLUSTRATION 18B.4 Revenue Recognition over Time—Franchise
The entries for Tech Solvers related to the franchise are summarized in
Illustration 18B.5.
ILLUSTRATION 18B.5 Franchise Entries—Revenue Recognized over
Time
As indicated, Tech Solvers satisfies the performance obligation related to the
franchise rights and training materials over time (in this case, on a straight-line
basis). Continuing franchise fees are recognized when uncertainty related to the
variable consideration is resolved.
In summary, analysis of the characteristics of the Tech Solvers franchise
indicates that it does not reflect a right that is transferred at a point in time. That
is, Tech Solvers has a continuing obligation to provide updated materials and
ongoing support, suggesting the control of the right has not been transferred to
the franchisee. Thus, revenue from the franchise rights is recognized over time.

--- Page 1609 ---
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
asset-liability approach
assurance-type warranty
bill-and-hold arrangement
*Billings account
collectibility
consignee
consignment
consignor
*continuing franchise fees
contract
contract assets
contract liability
contract modification
*cost-recovery (zero-profit) method
*cost-to-cost basis
*franchisee
*franchises
*franchisor
*initial franchise fee
*input measures
*output measures
*percentage-of-completion method
performance obligation
principal-agent relationship
repurchase agreements
revenue recognition principle
service-type warranty

--- Page 1610 ---
transaction price
upfront fees
warranties
Learning Objectives Review
1 Understand the fundamental concepts related to revenue
recognition and measurement.
Most revenue transactions pose few problems for revenue recognition. This is
because, in many cases, the transaction is initiated and completed at the same
time. Increasing complexity of business and revenue arrangements have resulted
in revenue recognition practices being identified as the most prevalent reasons
for accounting restatements. A number of the revenue recognition issues relate
to possible fraudulent behavior by company executives and employees, but are
also sometimes due to incomplete and inconsistent accounting guidelines for
revenue recognition. A recent standard provides a set of guidelines to follow in
determining when revenue should be reported and how it should be measured.
The standard is comprehensive and applies to all companies. As a result,
comparability and consistency in reporting revenue should be enhanced.
The five steps in the revenue recognition process are: (1) identify the contract
with customers, (2) identify the separate performance obligations in the contract,
(3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the
separate performance obligations, and (5) recognize revenue when each
performance obligation is satisfied.
2 Understand and apply the five-step revenue recognition process.
Identify the contract with customers. A contract is an agreement that
creates enforceable rights or obligations. A company applies the revenue
guidance to contracts with customers.
Identify the separate performance obligations in the contract. A
performance obligation is a promise in a contract to provide a product or service
to a customer. A contract may be comprised of multiple performance obligations.
The accounting for multiple performance obligations is based on evaluation of
whether the product or service is distinct within the contract. If each of the goods
or services is distinct, but all are interdependent and interrelated, these goods
and services are combined and reported as one performance obligation.
Determine the transaction price. The transaction price is the amount of
consideration that a company expects to receive from a customer in exchange for

--- Page 1611 ---
transferring goods and services. In determining the transaction price, companies
must consider the following factors: (1) variable consideration, (2) time value of
money, (3) non-cash consideration, and (4) consideration paid or payable to a
customer.
Allocate the transaction price to the separate performance obligations.
If more than one performance obligation exists in a contract, allocate the
transaction price based on relative standalone selling prices. Estimates of
standalone selling price can be based on (1) an adjusted market assessment, (2)
the expected cost plus a margin approach, or (3) a residual approach.
Recognize revenue when the company satisfies its performance
obligation. A company satisfies its performance obligation when the customer
obtains control of the good or service. Companies satisfy performance obligations
either at a point in time or over a period of time. Companies recognize revenue
over a period of time if one of the following criteria is met: (1) the customer
receives and consumes the benefits as the seller performs, (2) the customer
controls the asset as it is created, or (3) the company does not have an alternative
use for the asset.
3 Apply the five-step process to major revenue recognition issues.
Refer to Illustration 18.26 for a summary of the accounting for (a) sales returns
and allowances, (b) repurchase agreements, (c) bill-and-hold arrangements, (d)
principal-agent relationships, (e) consignments, (f) warranties, and (g) non-
refundable upfront fees.
4 Describe presentation and disclosure regarding revenue.
Under the asset-liability approach for recognizing revenue, companies present
contract assets and contract liabilities on their statements of financial position.
Contract assets are rights to receive consideration. A contract liability is a
company’s obligation to transfer goods or services to a customer for which the
company has received consideration from the customer. Companies must
determine if new performance obligations are created by a contract modification
and may also report assets associated with fulfillment costs and contract
acquisition costs related to a revenue arrangement. Companies disclose
qualitative and quantitative information about (a) contracts with customers with
disaggregation of revenue, presentation of opening and closing balances in
contract assets and contract liabilities, and significant information related to their
performance obligations; (b) significant judgments that affect the determination
of the transaction price, the allocation of the transaction price, and the

--- Page 1612 ---
determination of the timing of revenue; and (c) assets recognized from costs
incurred to fulfill a contract.
*5 Apply the percentage-of-completion method for long-term
contracts.
To apply the percentage-of-completion method to long-term contracts, a company
must have some basis for measuring the progress toward completion at particular
interim dates. One of the most popular input measures used to determine the
progress toward completion is the cost-to-cost basis. Using this basis, a company
measures the percentage of completion by comparing costs incurred to date with
the most recent estimate of the total costs to complete the contract. The company
applies that percentage to the total revenue or the estimated total gross profit on
the contract, to arrive at the amount of revenue or gross profit to be recognized to
date.
*6 Apply the cost-recovery method for long-term contracts.
Under this method, companies recognize gross profit only at the point of sale,
that is, when the company completes the contract. The company accumulates
costs of long-term contracts in process and current billings. This method
(sometimes referred to as the zero-profit method) recognizes revenue only to the
extent of costs incurred that are expected to be recoverable. Profit is recognized
only after all costs are incurred.
*7 Identify the proper accounting for losses on long-term contracts.
Two types of losses can become evident under long-term contracts. (1) Loss in
current period on a profitable contract: Under the percentage-of-completion
method only, the estimated cost increase requires a current-period adjustment of
excess gross profit recognized on the project in prior periods. The company
records this adjustment as a loss in the current period because it is a change in
accounting estimate. (2) Loss on an unprofitable contract: Under both the
percentage-of-completion and the cost-recovery methods, the company must
recognize in the current period the entire expected contract loss.
*8 Explain revenue recognition for franchises.
In a franchise arrangement, the franchisor satisfies its performance obligation for
a franchise license when control of the franchise rights is transferred, generally
when the franchisee begins operation of the franchise. In situations where the
franchisor provides access to the rights rather than transferring control of the

--- Page 1613 ---
franchise rights, the franchise rights’ revenue is recognized over time rather than
at a point in time. Franchisors recognize continuing franchise fees over time (as
uncertainty related to the variable consideration is resolved).
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Outback Industries manufactures emergency power equipment. Its most
popular generator is a model called the E-Booster, which has a retail price of
$1,500 and costs Outback $740 to manufacture. It sells the E-Booster on a
standalone basis directly to businesses, as well as providing installation
services. Outback also distributes the E-Booster through a consignment
agreement with Lenz Home Store. Income data for Outback’s first quarter of
2022 from operations other than the E-Booster generator are as follows.
Revenues $6,500,000
Expenses
4,350,000
Outback has the following information related to four E-Booster revenue
arrangements during the first quarter of 2022.
1. Outback entered into an arrangement with the Grocers Co-op to deliver E-
Boosters for the meat lockers in the grocers’ stores. Outback provides a 5%
volume discount for E-Boosters purchased by Grocers Co-op if at least
$450,000 of E-Boosters are purchased during 2022. By March 31, 2022,
Outback has made sales of $360,000 ($1,500 × 240 generators) to Grocers
Co-op. Based on prior experience with this promotion in two neighboring
states, the discount threshold is met for the year if more than one-half of
the target has been met by mid-year.
2. On January 1, 2022, Outback sells 20 E-Boosters to Nick’s Liquors. Nick’s
signs a 6-month note due in 6 months at an annual interest rate of 12%.
Outback allows Nick’s to return any E-Boosters that it cannot use within
120 days and receive a full refund. Based on prior experience, Outback
estimates that three units will be returned (using the most likely outcome
approach). Outback’s costs to recover the products will be immaterial, and
the returned generators are expected to be resold at a profit. No E-Boosters
have been returned as of March 31, 2022, and Outback still estimates that
three units will be returned in the future.

--- Page 1614 ---
3. Outback sells 30 E-Boosters to First Bank, to provide uninterrupted power
for bank branches with ATMs, for a total contract price of $50,000. In
addition to the E-Boosters, Outback also provides installation at a
standalone selling price of $200 per E-Booster; the cost to Outback to
install is $150 per E-Booster. The E-Boosters are delivered and installed on
March 1, 2022, and full payment is made to Outback.
4. Outback ships 300 E-Boosters to Lenz Home Store on consignment. By
March 31, 2022, Lenz Home Store has sold three-fourths of the consigned
merchandise at the listed price of $1,500 per unit. Lenz Home Store
notifies Outback of the sales, retains an 8% commission, and remits the
cash due to Outback.
Instructions
a. Determine income for Outback Industries for the first quarter of 2022.
(Ignore taxes.)
b. In reviewing the credit history of Nick’s Liquors, Outback has some
concerns about the collectibility of the full amount due on the note. Briefly
discuss how collectibility of the note affects revenue recognition and
income measurement for Outback.
Solution
a. The amount of revenue and expense recognized on each of the arrangements
is as follows.
1. Sales revenue [.95 × ($1,500 × 240)]
$342,000
Cost of goods sold ($740 × 240)
177,600
Gross profit
$164,400
2. Sales revenue (20 × $1,500)
30,000
Less: Estimated returns (3 × $1,500)
4,500
Net sales
25,500
Cost of goods sold (17 × $740)
12,580
Gross profit
12,920
Interest revenue ($30,000 × .12 × 3/12)
900
Income on this arrangement
13,820
3. The total transaction price of $50,000 is
allocated between the equipment and
installation. The transaction price for the

--- Page 1615 ---
equipment and installation is allocated
based on relative standalone selling prices:
Equipment: $44,118 = ($45,000 ÷ $51,000*) × $50,000
Installation: $5,882 = ($6,000 ÷ $51,000) × $50,000
*$45,000 + $6,000
Sales revenue
$44,118
Cost of goods sold (30 × $740)
22,200
Gross profit
21,918
Installation revenue
5,882
Installation expense (30 × $150)
4,500
Net profit
1,382
Income on this arrangement
23,300
4. Sales revenue (225* × $1,500)
337,500
Cost of goods sold (225 × $740)
166,500
Gross profit
171,000
Commission expense ($337,500 × .08)
27,000
Net income on this arrangement
144,000
Income on E-Booster
$345,520
*300 × .75
Outback Industries’ income for the quarter: $6,500,000 − $4,350,000 +
$345,520 = $2,495,520.
b. Whether a company will get paid for satisfying a performance obligation is
not a consideration in determining revenue recognition. That is, the amount
recognized is not adjusted for customer credit risk. If significant doubt exists
at contract inception about collectibility, Outback reports the revenue gross
and then presents an allowance for any impairment due to bad debts, which
will reduce net income and which is reported as an operating expense in the
income statement.
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics
Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are available for
practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the
appendices to the chapter.

--- Page 1616 ---
Questions
1. Explain the current environment regarding revenue recognition.
2. What was viewed as a major criticism of IFRS as it relates to revenue
recognition?
3. Describe the revenue recognition principle.
4. Identify the five steps in the revenue recognition process.
5. Describe the critical factor in evaluating whether a performance obligation is
satisfied.
6. When is revenue recognized in the following situations? (a) Revenue from
selling products, (b) revenue from services performed, (c) revenue from
permitting others to use company assets, and (d) revenue from disposing of
assets other than products.
7. Explain the importance of a contract in the revenue recognition process.
8. On October 10, 2022, Executor SpA entered into a contract with Belisle Inc. to
transfer Executor’s specialty products (sales value of €10,000, cost of €6,500) on
December 15, 2022. Belisle agrees to make a payment of €5,000 upon delivery
and signs a promissory note to pay the remaining balance on January 15, 2023.
What entries does Executor make in 2022 on this contract? Ignore time value of
money considerations.
9. What is a performance obligation? Under what conditions does a performance
obligation exist?
10. When must multiple performance obligations in a revenue arrangement be
accounted for separately?
11. Engelhart Implements Inc. sells tractors to area farmers. The price for each
tractor includes GPS positioning service for 9 months (which facilitates field
settings for planting and harvesting equipment). The GPS service is regularly sold
on a standalone basis by Engelhart for a monthly fee. After the 9-month period,
the consumer can renew the service on a fee basis. Does Engelhart have one or
multiple performance obligations? Explain.
12. What is the transaction price? What additional factors related to the
transaction price must be considered in determining the transaction price?
13. What are some examples of variable consideration? What are the two
approaches for estimating variable consideration?
14. Allee Corp. is evaluating a revenue arrangement to determine proper revenue
recognition. The contract is for construction of 10 speedboats for a contract price
of $400,000. The customer needs the boats in its showrooms by February 1,

--- Page 1617 ---
2023, for the sales season; the customer provides a bonus payment of $21,000 if
all boats are delivered by the February 1 deadline. The bonus is reduced by
$7,000 each week that the boats are delivered after the deadline until no bonus is
paid if the boats are delivered after February 15, 2023. Allee frequently includes
such bonus terms in its contracts and thus has good historical data for estimating
the probabilities of completion at different dates. It estimates an equal
probability (25%) for each full delivery outcome. What approach should Allee use
to determine the transaction price for this contract? Explain.
15. Refer to the information in Question 14. Assume that Allee has limited
experience with a construction project on the same scale as the 10 speedboats.
How does this affect the accounting for the variable consideration?
16. In measuring the transaction price, explain the accounting for (a) time value
of money and (b) non-cash consideration.
17. What is the proper accounting for volume discounts on sales of products?
18. On what basis should the transaction price be allocated to various
performance obligations? Identify the approaches for allocating the transaction
price.
19. Fuhremann Co. is a full-service manufacturer of surveillance equipment.
Customers can purchase any combination of equipment, installation services,
and training as part of Fuhremann’s security services. Thus, these performance
obligations are separate with individual standalone selling prices. Laplante Ltd.
purchased cameras, installation, and training at a total price of £80,000.
Estimated standalone selling prices of the equipment, installation, and training
are £90,000, £7,000, and £3,000, respectively. How should the transaction price
be allocated to the equipment, installation, and training?
20. When does a company satisfy a performance obligation? Identify the
indicators of satisfaction of a performance obligation.
21. Under what conditions does a company recognize revenue over a period of
time?
22. How do companies recognize revenue from a performance obligation over
time?
23. Explain the accounting for sales with right of return.
24. What are the reporting issues in a sale with a repurchase agreement?
25. Explain a bill-and-hold arrangement. When is revenue recognized in these
situations?
26. Explain a principal-agent relationship and its significance to revenue
recognition.

--- Page 1618 ---
27. What is the nature of a sale on consignment?
28. What are the two types of warranties? Explain the accounting for each type.
29. Campus Cellular provides cell phones and 1 year of cell service to students
for an upfront, non-refundable fee of $300 and a usage fee of $5 per month.
Students may renew the service for each year they are on campus (on average,
students renew their service one time). What amount of revenue should Campus
Cellular recognize in the first year of the contract?
30. Describe the conditions when contract assets and liabilities are recognized
and presented in financial statements.
31. Explain the accounting for contract modifications.
32. Explain the reporting for (a) costs to fulfill a contract and (b) collectibility.
33. What qualitative and quantitative disclosures are required related to revenue
recognition?
*34. What are the two basic methods of accounting for long-term construction
contracts? Indicate the circumstances that determine when one or the other of
these methods should be used.
*35. For what reasons should the percentage-of-completion method be used over
the cost-recovery method whenever possible?
*36. What methods are used in practice to determine the extent of progress
toward completion? Identify some “input measures” and some “output
measures” that might be used to determine the extent of progress.
*37. What are the two types of losses that can become evident in accounting for
long-term contracts? What is the nature of each type of loss? How is each type
accounted for?
*38. Why in franchise arrangements may it be improper to recognize the entire
franchise fee as revenue at the date of sale?
*39. How should a franchisor account for continuing franchise fees and routine
sales of equipment and supplies to franchisees?
Brief Exercises
BE18.1 (LO 1) Leno Computers manufactures tablet computers for sale to
retailers such as Fallon Electronics. Leno sold and delivered 200 tablet
computers to Fallon for $20,000 on January 5, 2022. Fallon agreed to pay for the
200 tablet computers within 30 days. Fallon has a good credit rating and should
have no difficulty in making payment to Leno. (a) Explain whether a valid
contract exists between Leno Computers and Fallon Electronics. (b) Leno

--- Page 1619 ---
Computers has not yet delivered the tablet computers to Fallon Electronics. What
might cause a valid contract not to exist between Leno and Fallon?
BE18.2 (LO 1) On May 10, 2022, Cosmo Co. enters into a contract to deliver a
product to Greig Inc. on June 15, 2022. Greig agrees to pay the full contract price
of $2,000 on July 15, 2022. The cost of the goods is $1,300. Cosmo delivers the
product to Greig on June 15, 2022, and receives payment on July 15, 2022.
Prepare the journal entries for Cosmo related to this contract. Either party may
terminate the contract without compensation until one of the parties performs.
BE18.3 (LO 1, 2) Hillside Company enters into a contract with Sanchez Inc. to
provide a software license and 3 years of customer support. The customer-
support services require specialized knowledge that only Hillside Company’s
employees can provide. How many performance obligations are in the contract?
BE18.4 (LO 2) Destin Company signs a contract to manufacture a new 3D
printer for $80,000. The contract includes installation which costs $4,000 and a
maintenance agreement over the life of the printer at a cost of $10,000. The
printer cannot be operated without the installation. Destin Company as well as
other companies could provide the installation and maintenance agreement.
What are Destin Company’s performance obligations in this contract?
BE18.5 (LO 2) Ismail Construction enters into a contract to design and build a
hospital. Ismail is responsible for the overall management of the project and
identifies various goods and services to be provided, including engineering, site
clearance, foundation, procurement, construction of the structure, piping and
wiring, installation of equipment, and finishing. Does Ismail have a single
performance obligation to the customer in this revenue arrangement? Explain.
BE18.6 (LO 2) Nair A.G. enters into a contract with a customer to build an
apartment building for €1,000,000. The customer hopes to rent apartments at
the beginning of the school year and provides a performance bonus of €150,000
to be paid if the building is ready for rental beginning August 1, 2023. The bonus
is reduced by €50,000 each week that completion is delayed. Nair commonly
includes these completion bonuses in its contracts and, based on prior
experience, estimates the following completion outcomes:
Completed by
Probability
August 1, 2023
70%
August 8, 2023
20
August 15, 2023
5
After August 15, 2023
5
Determine the transaction price for this contract.

--- Page 1620 ---
BE18.7 (LO 2) Referring to the revenue arrangement in BE18.6, determine the
transaction price for the contract, assuming (a) Nair is only able to estimate
whether or not the building can be completed by August 1, 2023 (Nair estimates
that there is a 70% chance that the building will be completed by August 1, 2023),
and (b) Nair has limited information with which to develop a reliable estimate of
completion by the August 1, 2023, deadline.
BE18.8 (LO 2) Presented below are three revenue recognition situations.
a. Yang sells goods to MTN for ¥1,000,000, payment due at delivery.
b. Yang sells goods on account to Grifols for ¥800,000, payment due in 30
days.
c. Yang sells goods to Magnus for ¥500,000, payment due in two installments,
the first installment payable in 18 months and the second payment due 6
months later. The present value of the future payments is ¥464,000.
Indicate the transaction price for each of these situations and when revenue will
be recognized.
BE18.9 (LO 2) On January 2, 2022, Adani SE sells goods to Geo Company in
exchange for a zero-interest-bearing note with a face value of €11,000, with
payment due in 12 months. The fair value of the goods at the date of sale is
€10,000 (cost €6,000). Prepare the journal entry or entries to record this
transaction on January 2, 2022. How much total revenue should be recognized in
2022?
BE18.10 (LO 2) On March 1, 2022, Parnevik Company sold goods to Goosen
Inc. for $660,000 in exchange for a 5-year, zero-interest-bearing note in the face
amount of $1,062,937 (an imputed rate of 10%). The goods have an inventory
cost on Parnevik’s books of $400,000. Prepare the journal entries for Parnevik on
(a) March 1, 2022, and (b) December 31, 2022.
BE18.11 (LO 2, 3) Telephone Sellers sells prepaid telephone cards to customers.
Telephone Sellers then pays the telecommunications company, TeleExpress, for
the actual use of its telephone lines related to the prepaid telephone cards.
Assume that Telephone Sellers sells £4,000 of prepaid cards in January 2022. It
then pays TeleExpress based on usage, which turns out to be 50% in February,
30% in March, and 20% in April. The total payment by Telephone Sellers for
TeleExpress lines over the 3 months is £3,000. Indicate how much income
Telephone Sellers should recognize in January, February, March, and April.
BE18.12 (LO 2, 3) Manual Company sells goods to Nolan Company during
2022. It offers Nolan the following rebates based on total sales to Nolan. If total
sales to Nolan are 10,000 units, it will grant a rebate of 2%. If it sells up to 20,000
units, it will grant a rebate of 4%. If it sells up to 30,000 units, it will grant a

--- Page 1621 ---
rebate of 6%. In the first quarter of the year, Manual sells 11,000 units to Nolan
at a sales price of $110,000. Manual, based on past experience, has sold over
40,000 units to Nolan, and these sales normally take place in the third quarter of
the year. What amount of revenue should Manual report for the sale of the
11,000 units in the first quarter of the year?
BE18.13 (LO 3) On July 10, 2022, Amodt Music sold CDs to retailers on account
and recorded sales revenue of $700,000 (cost $560,000). Amodt grants the right
to return CDs that do not sell in 3 months following delivery. Past experience
indicates that the normal return rate is 15%. By October 11, 2022, retailers
returned CDs to Amodt and were granted credit of $78,000. Prepare Amodt’s
journal entries to record (a) the sale on July 10, 2022, (b) $78,000 of returns on
October 11, 2022, and (c) any entry necessary on October 31, 2022. Assume that
Amodt prepares financial statement on October 31, 2022.
BE18.14 (LO 3) Kristin Company sells 300 units of its products for $20 each to
Logan Inc. for cash. Kristin allows Logan to return any unused product within 30
days and receive a full refund. The cost of each product is $12. To determine the
transaction price, Kristin decides that the approach that is most predictive of the
amount of consideration to which it will be entitled is the probability-weighted
amount. Using the probability-weighted amount, Kristin estimates that (1) 10
products will be returned and (2) the returned products are expected to be resold
at a profit. Indicate the amount of (a) net sales, (b) estimated liability for refunds,
and (c) cost of goods sold that Kristin should report in its financial statements
(assume that none of the products have been returned at the financial statement
date).
BE18.15 (LO 3) On June 1, 2022, Mills Company sells €200,000 of shelving
units to a local retailer, ShopBarb, which is planning to expand its stores in the
area. Under the agreement, ShopBarb asks Mills to retain the shelving units at its
factory until the new stores are ready for installation. Title passes to ShopBarb at
the time the agreement is signed. The shelving units are delivered to the stores
on September 1, 2022, and ShopBarb pays in full. Prepare the journal entries for
this bill-and-hold arrangement (assuming that conditions for recognizing the sale
as a bill-and-hold sale have been met) for Mills on June 1 and September 1, 2022.
The cost of the shelving units to Mills is €110,000.
BE18.16 (LO 3) Travel SA sells tickets for a Caribbean cruise on ShipAway
Cruise Lines to Carmel Company employees. The total cruise package price to
Carmel Company employees is €70,000. Travel SA receives a commission of 6%
of the total price. Travel SA therefore remits €65,800 to ShipAway. Prepare the
journal entry to record the remittance and revenue recognized by Travel SA on
this transaction.

--- Page 1622 ---
BE18.17 (LO 3) Jansen Corporation shipped $20,000 of merchandise on
consignment to Gooch Company. Jansen paid freight costs of $2,000. Gooch
Company paid $500 for local advertising, which is reimbursable from Jansen. By
year-end, 60% of the merchandise had been sold for $21,500. Gooch notified
Jansen, retained a 10% commission, and remitted the cash due to Jansen.
Prepare Jansen’s journal entry when the cash is received.
BE18.18 (LO 3) Talarczyk Company sold 10,000 Super-Spreaders on December
31, 2022, at a total price of $1,000,000, with a warranty guarantee that the
product was free of any defects. The cost of the spreaders sold is $550,000. The
assurance warranties extend for a 2-year period and are estimated to cost
$40,000. Talarczyk also sold extended warranties (service-type warranties)
related to 2,000 spreaders for 2 years beyond the 2-year period for $12,000.
Given this information, determine the amounts to report for the following at
December 31, 2022: sales revenue, warranty expense, unearned warranty
revenue, warranty liability, and cash.
BE18.19 (LO 4) On May 1, 2022, Mount Company enters into a contract to
transfer a product to Eric Company on September 30, 2022. It is agreed that Eric
will pay the full price of $25,000 in advance on June 15, 2022. Eric pays on June
15, 2022, and Mount delivers the product on September 30, 2022. Prepare the
journal entries required for Mount in 2022.
BE18.20 (LO 3) Nate Beggs signs a 1-year contract with BlueBox Video. The
terms of the contract are that Nate is required to pay a non-refundable initiation
fee of €100. No annual membership fee is charged in the first year. After the first
year, membership can be renewed by paying an annual membership fee of €5 per
month. BlueBox determines that its customers, on average, renew their annual
membership three times after the first year before terminating their
membership. What amount of revenue should BlueBox recognize in its first year?
BE18.21 (LO 4) Stengel Co. enters into a 3-year contract to perform
maintenance service for Laplante SE. Laplante promises to pay €100,000 at the
beginning of each year (the standalone selling price of the service at contract
inception is €100,000 per year). At the end of the second year, the contract is
modified and the fee for the third year of service, which reflects a reduced menu
of maintenance services to be performed at Laplante locations, is reduced to
€80,000 (the standalone selling price of the services at the beginning of the third
year is €80,000 per year). Briefly describe the accounting for this contract
modification.
*BE18.22 (LO 5) Ting Group began work on a ¥7,000,000 contract in 2022 to
construct an office building. During 2022, Ting Group incurred costs of
¥1,700,000, billed its customers for ¥1,200,000, and collected ¥960,000. At
December 31, 2022, the estimated additional costs to complete the project total

--- Page 1623 ---
¥3,300,000. Prepare Ting’s 2022 journal entries using the percentage-of-
completion method.
*BE18.23 (LO 6) Guillen, Inc. began work on a $7,000,000 contract in 2022 to
construct an office building. Guillen uses the cost-recovery method. At December
31, 2022, the balances in certain accounts were Construction in Process
$1,715,000, Accounts Receivable $240,000, and Billings on Construction in
Process $1,000,000. Indicate how these accounts would be reported in Guillen’s
December 31, 2022, statement of financial position.
*BE18.24 (LO 7) Archer Construction Company began work on a $420,000
construction contract in 2022. During 2022, Archer incurred costs of $278,000,
billed its customer for $215,000, and collected $175,000. At December 31, 2022,
the estimated additional costs to complete the project total $162,000. Prepare
Archer’s journal entry to record profit or loss, if any, using the percentage-of-
completion method.
*BE18.25 (LO 8) Frozen Delight, Inc. charges an initial franchise fee of $75,000
for the right to operate as a franchisee of Frozen Delight. Of this amount,
$25,000 is collected immediately. The remainder is collected in four equal annual
installments of $12,500 each. These installments have a present value of $41,402.
As part of the total franchise fee, Frozen Delight also provides training (with a
fair value of $2,000) to help franchisees get the store ready to open. The
franchise agreement is signed on April 1, 2022, training is completed and the
store opens on July 1, 2022. Prepare the journal entries required by Frozen
Delight in 2022.
Exercises
E18.1 (LO 1) (Fundamentals of Revenue Recognition) Presented below are
five different situations. Provide an answer to each of these questions.
1. The Kawaski Jeep dealership sells both new and used Jeeps. Some of the
Jeeps are used for demonstration purposes; after 6 months, these Jeeps are
then sold as used vehicles. Should Kawaski Jeep record these sales of used
Jeeps as revenue or as a gain?
2. One of the main indicators of whether control has passed to the customer is
whether revenue has been earned. Is this statement correct?
3. One of the five steps in determining whether revenue should be recognized
is whether the sale has been realized. Do you agree?
4. One of the criteria that contracts must meet to apply the revenue standard is
that collectibility of the sales price must be reasonably possible. Is this
correct?

--- Page 1624 ---
5. Many believe the distinction between revenue and gains is important in the
financial statements. Given that both revenues and gains increase net
income, why is the distinction important?
E18.2 (LO 1) (Fundamentals of Revenue Recognition) Respond to the
questions related to the following statements.
1. A wholly unperformed contract is one in which the company has neither
transferred the promised goods or services to the customer nor received, or
become entitled to receive, any consideration. Why are these contracts not
recorded in the accounts?
2. Performance obligations are the unit of account for purposes of applying the
revenue recognition standard and therefore determine when and how
revenue is recognized. Is this statement correct?
3. Elaina Company contracts with a customer and provides the customer with
an option to purchase additional goods for free or at a discount. Should
Elaina Company account for this option?
4. The transaction price is generally not adjusted to reflect the customer’s
credit risk, meaning the risk that the customer will not pay the amount to
which the entity is entitled under the contract. Comment on this statement.
E18.3 (LO 1, 2) (Existence of a Contract) On May 1, 2022, Richardson Inc.
entered into a contract to deliver one of its specialty mowers to Kickapoo
Landscaping Co. The contract requires Kickapoo to pay the contract price of €900
in advance on May 15, 2022. Kickapoo pays Richardson on May 15, 2022, and
Richardson delivers the mower (with cost of €575) on May 31, 2022.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry on May 1, 2022, for Richardson.
b. Prepare the journal entry on May 15, 2022, for Richardson.
c. Prepare the journal entry on May 31, 2022, for Richardson.
E18.4 (LO 2) (Determine Transaction Price) Jupiter Company sells goods
to Danone Inc. by accepting a note receivable on January 2, 2022. The goods have
a sales price of $610,000 (cost of $500,000). The terms are net 30. If Danone
pays within 5 days, however, it receives a cash discount of $10,000. Past history
indicates that the cash discount will be taken. On January 28, 2022, Danone
makes payment to Jupiter for the full sales price.
Instructions

--- Page 1625 ---
a. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record the sale and related cost of
goods sold for Jupiter Company on January 2, 2022, and the payment on
January 28, 2022. Assume that Jupiter Company records the January 2,
2022, transaction using the net method.
b. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record the sale and related cost of
goods sold for Jupiter Company on January 2, 2022, and the payment on
January 28, 2022. Assume that Jupiter Company records the January 2,
2022, transaction using the gross method.
E18.5 (LO 2) (Determine Transaction Price) Jeff Heun, president of
Concrete Always, agrees to construct a concrete cart path at Dakota Golf Club.
Concrete Always enters into a contract with Dakota to construct the path for
$200,000. In addition, as part of the contract, a performance bonus of $40,000
will be paid based on the timing of completion. The performance bonus will be
paid fully if completed by the agreed-upon date. The performance bonus
decreases by $10,000 per week for every week beyond the agreed-upon
completion date. Jeff has been involved in a number of contracts that had
performance bonuses as part of the agreement in the past. As a result, he is fairly
confident that he will receive a good portion of the performance bonus. Jeff
estimates, given the constraints of his schedule related to other jobs, that there is
55% probability that he will complete the project on time, a 30% probability that
he will be 1 week late, and a 15% probability that he will be 2 weeks late.
Instructions
a. Determine the transaction price that Concrete Always should compute for
this agreement.
b. Assume that Jeff Heun has reviewed his work schedule and decided that it
makes sense to complete this project on time. Assuming that he now
believes that the probability for completing the project on time is 90%
(otherwise it will be finished 1 week late), determine the transaction price.
E18.6 (LO 2) (Determine Transaction Price) Bill Amends, owner of Real
Estate Inc., buys and sells commercial properties. Recently, he sold land for
$3,000,000 to the Blackhawk Group, a developer that plans to build a new
shopping mall. In addition to the $3,000,000 sales price, Blackhawk Group
agrees to pay Real Estate Inc. 1% of the retail sales of the mall for 10 years.
Blackhawk estimates that retail sales in a typical mall are $1,000,000 a year.
Given the substantial increase in online sales in the retail market, Bill had
originally indicated that he would prefer a higher price for the land instead of the
1% royalty arrangement and suggested a price of $3,250,000. However,
Blackhawk would not agree to those terms.

--- Page 1626 ---
Instructions
What is the transaction price for the land and related royalty payment that Real
Estate Inc. should record?
E18.7 (LO 2) (Determine Transaction Price) Blair Biotech enters into a
licensing agreement with Pang Pharmaceutical for a drug under development.
Blair will receive a payment of ¥10,000,000 if the drug receives regulatory
approval. Based on prior experience in the drug-approval process, Blair
determines that the drug has a 90% chance of approval, and a 10% chance of
denial.
Instructions
a. Determine the transaction price of the arrangement for Blair Biotech.
b. Assuming that regulatory approval was granted on December 20, 2022, and
that Blair received the payment from Pang on January 15, 2023, prepare the
journal entries for Blair. The license meets the criteria for point-in-time
revenue recognition.
E18.8 (LO 2, 3) (Determine Transaction Price) Aaron’s Agency sells an
insurance policy offered by Capital Insurance Company for a commission of $100
on January 2, 2022. In addition, Aaron will receive an additional commission of
$10 each year for as long as the policyholder does not cancel the policy. After
selling the policy, Aaron does not have any remaining performance obligations.
Based on Aaron’s significant experience with these types of policies, it estimates
that policyholders on average renew the policy for 4.5 years. It has no evidence to
suggest that previous policyholder behavior will change.
Instructions
a. Determine the transaction price of the arrangement for Aaron, assuming 100
policies are sold.
b. Determine the revenue that Aaron will recognize in 2022.
E18.9 (LO 2, 3) (Determine Transaction Price) Taylor Marina has 300
available slips that rent for $800 per season. Payments must be made in full by
the start of the boating season, April 1, 2023. The boating season ends October 31,
and the marina has a December 31 year-end. Slips for future seasons may be
reserved if paid for by December 31, 2023. Under a new policy, if payment for
2024 season slips is made by December 31, 2023, a 5% discount is allowed. If
payment for 2025 season slips is made by December 31, 2023, renters get a 20%
discount (this promotion hopefully will provide cash flow for major dock repairs).

--- Page 1627 ---
On December 31, 2022, all 300 slips for the 2023 season were rented at full price.
On December 31, 2023, 200 slips were reserved and paid for the 2024 boating
season, and 60 slips were reserved and paid for the 2025 boating season.
Instructions
a. Prepare the appropriate journal entries for December 31, 2022, and
December 31, 2023.
b. Assume the marina operator is unsophisticated in business. Explain the
managerial significance of the above accounting to this person.
E18.10 (LO 2) (Allocate Transaction Price) Geraths Windows manufactures
and sells custom storm windows for three-season porches. Geraths also provides
installation service for the windows. The installation process does not involve
changes in the windows, so this service can be performed by other vendors.
Geraths enters into the following contract on July 1, 2022, with a local
homeowner. The customer purchases windows for a price of $2,400 and chooses
Geraths to do the installation. Geraths charges the same price for the windows
whether it does the installation, or not. The installation service is estimated to
have a standalone selling price of $600. The customer pays Geraths $2,000
(which equals the standalone selling price of the windows, at a cost of $1,100)
upon delivery and the remaining balance upon installation of the windows. The
windows are delivered on September 1, 2022, Geraths completes installation on
October 15, 2022, and the customer pays the balance due.
Instructions
Prepare the journal entries for Geraths in 2022. (Round amounts to nearest
dollar.)
E18.11 (LO 2) (Allocate Transaction Price) Refer to the revenue
arrangement in E18.10.
Instructions
Repeat the requirements, assuming that (a) Geraths estimates the standalone
selling price of the installation based on an estimated cost of $400 plus a margin
of 20% on installation cost, and that (b) given the uncertainty of finding skilled
labor, Geraths is unable to develop a reliable estimate for the standalone selling
price of the installation. (Round amounts to nearest dollar.)
E18.12 (LO 3) (Allocate Transaction Price) Shaw Ltd. sells goods that cost
£300,000 to Ricard Company for £410,000 on January 2, 2022. The sales price
includes an installation fee, which has a standalone selling price of £40,000. The
standalone selling price of the goods is £370,000. The installation is considered a
separate performance obligation and is expected to take 6 months to complete.

--- Page 1628 ---
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries (if any) to record the sale on January 2, 2022.
b. Shaw prepares an income statement for the first quarter of 2022, ending on
March 31, 2022 (installation was completed on June 18, 2022). How much
revenue should Shaw recognize related to its sale to Ricard?
E18.13 (LO 3) (Allocate Transaction Price) Crankshaft Company
manufactures equipment. Crankshaft’s products range from simple automated
machinery to complex systems containing numerous components. Unit selling
prices range from €200,000 to €1,500,000 and are quoted inclusive of
installation. The installation process does not involve changes to the features of
the equipment and does not require proprietary information about the
equipment in order for the installed equipment to perform to specifications.
Crankshaft has the following arrangement with Winkerbean SA.
Winkerbean purchases equipment from Crankshaft for a price of €1,000,000
and contracts with Crankshaft to install the equipment. Crankshaft charges
the same price for the equipment whether it does the installation or not.
Using market data, Crankshaft determines installation service is estimated to
have a standalone selling price of €50,000. The cost of the equipment is
€600,000.
Winkerbean is obligated to pay Crankshaft the €1,000,000 upon the delivery
and installation of the equipment.
Crankshaft delivers and installs the equipment on September 30, 2022. The
equipment has a useful life of 10 years. Assume that the equipment and the
installation are two distinct performance obligations which should be accounted
for separately.
Instructions
a. How should the transaction price of €1,000,000 be allocated among the
service obligations?
b. Prepare the journal entries for Crankshaft for this revenue arrangement on
September 30, 2022, assuming Crankshaft receives payment when
installation is completed.
E18.14 (LO 3) (Allocate Transaction Price) Refer to the revenue
arrangement in E18.13.
Instructions

--- Page 1629 ---
Repeat requirements (a) and (b), assuming that Crankshaft does not have the
market data to determine the standalone selling price of the installation services.
As a result, an expected cost plus margin approach is used. The cost of
installation is €36,000; Crankshaft prices these services with a 25% margin
relative to cost.
E18.15 (LO 3) (Allocate Transaction Price) Appliance Center is an
experienced home appliance dealer. Appliance Center also offers a number of
services for the home appliances that it sells. Assume that Appliance Center sells
ovens on a standalone basis. Appliance Center also sells installation services and
maintenance services for ovens. However, Appliance Center does not offer
installation or maintenance services to customers who buy ovens from other
vendors. Pricing for ovens is as follows.
Oven only
$ 800
Oven with installation service
850
Oven with maintenance services
975
Oven with installation and maintenance services 1,000
In each instance in which maintenance services are provided, the maintenance
service is separately priced within the arrangement at $175. Additionally, the
incremental amount charged by Appliance Center for installation approximates
the amount charged by independent third parties. Ovens are sold subject to a
general right of return. If a customer purchases an oven with installation and/or
maintenance services, in the event Appliance Center does not complete the
service satisfactorily, the customer is only entitled to a refund of the portion of
the fee that exceeds $800.
Instructions
a. Assume that a customer purchases an oven with both installation and
maintenance services for $1,000. Based on its experience, Appliance Center
believes that it is probable that the installation of the equipment will be
performed satisfactorily to the customer. Assume that the maintenance
services are priced separately (i.e., the three components are distinct).
Identify the separate performance obligations related to the Appliance
Center revenue arrangement.
b. Indicate the amount of revenue that should be allocated to the oven, the
installation, and the maintenance contract.
E18.16 (LO 3) (Sales with Returns) On March 10, 2022, Steele Company sold
to Barr Hardware 200 tool sets at a price of $50 each (cost $30 per set) with
terms of n/60, f.o.b. shipping point. Steele allows Barr to return any unused tool

--- Page 1630 ---
sets within 60 days of purchase. Steele estimates that: (1) 10 sets will be
returned, (2) the cost of recovering the products will be immaterial, and (3) the
returned tools sets can be resold at a profit. On March 25, 2022, Barr returned six
tool sets and received a credit to its account.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries for Steele to record (1) the sale on March 10, 2022,
(2) the return on March 25, 2022, and (3) any adjusting entries required on
March 31, 2022 (when Steele prepares financial statements). Steele believes
the original estimate of returns is correct.
b. Indicate the income statement and statement of financial position reporting
by Steele at March 31, 2022, of the information related to the Barr sales
transaction.
E18.17 (LO 3) (Sales with Returns) Refer to the revenue arrangement in
E18.16. Assume that instead of selling the tool sets on credit, Steele sold them for
cash.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries for Steele to record (1) the sale on March 10, 2022,
(2) the return on March 25, 2022, and (3) any adjusting entries required on
March 31, 2022 (when Steele prepares financial statements). Steele believes
the original estimate of returns is correct.
b. Indicate the income statement and statement of financial position reporting
by Steele at March 31, 2022, of the information related to the Barr sale.
E18.18 (LO 3) (Sales with Allowances) On October 2, 2022, Laplante
Company sold $6,000 of its elite camping gear (with a cost of $3,600) to Lynch
Outfitters. As part of the sales agreement, Laplante includes a provision that, if
Lynch is dissatisfied with the product, Laplante will grant an allowance on the
sales price or agree to take the product back (although returns are rare, given the
long-term relationship between Laplante and Lynch). Laplante expects total
allowances to Lynch to be $800. On October 16, 2022, Laplante grants an
allowance of $400 to Lynch because the color for some of the items delivered was
not the same as what appeared in the catalog.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries for Laplante to record (1) the sale on October 2, 2022,
(2) the granting of the allowance on October 16, 2022, and, (3) any
adjustment required on October 31, 2022 (when Laplante prepares financial

--- Page 1631 ---
statements). Laplante now estimates additional allowances of $250 will be
granted to Lynch in the future.
b. Indicate the reporting of information related to the Lynch transaction in
Laplante’s October 31, 2022 income statement and statement of financial
position.
E18.19 (LO 3) (Sales with Returns) On June 3, 2022, Hunt Company sold to
Ann Mount merchandise having a sales price of $8,000 (cost $6,000) with terms
of n/60, f.o.b. shipping point. Hunt estimates that merchandise with a sales value
of $800 will be returned. An invoice totaling $120 was received by Mount on
June 8 from Olympic Transport Service for the freight cost. Upon receipt of the
goods, on June 8, Mount returned to Hunt $300 of merchandise containing
flaws. Hunt expects the returned items to be resold at a profit. The freight on the
returned merchandise was $24, paid by Hunt on June 8. On July 16, the company
received a check for the balance due from Mount. No further returns are
expected.
Instructions
Prepare journal entries for Hunt Company to record all the events in June and
July.
E18.20 (LO 3) (Sales with Returns) Organic Growth Company is presently
testing a number of new agricultural seed planters that it has recently developed.
To stimulate interest, it has decided to grant to five of its largest customers the
unconditional right of return to these products if not fully satisfied. The right of
return extends for 4 months. Organic Growth estimates returns of 20%. Organic
Growth sells these planters on account for $1,500,000 (cost $750,000) on
January 2, 2022. Customers are required to pay the full amount due by March 15,
2022.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for Organic Growth at January 2, 2022.
b. Assume that one customer returns the planters on March 1, 2022, due to
unsatisfactory performance. Prepare the journal entry to record this
transaction, assuming this customer purchased $100,000 of planters from
Organic Growth. The other receivables are collected.
c. Assume Organic Growth prepares financial statements quarterly. Prepare the
necessary entries (if any) to adjust Organic Growth’s financial results for the
above transactions on March 31, 2022, assuming remaining expected returns
of $200,000.

--- Page 1632 ---
E18.21 (LO 3) (Sales with Returns) Uddin Publishing Co. publishes college
textbooks that are sold to bookstores on the following terms. Each title has a
fixed wholesale price, terms f.o.b. shipping point, and payment is due 60 days
after shipment. The retailer may return a maximum of 30% of an order at the
retailer’s expense. Sales are made only to retailers who have good credit ratings.
Past experience indicates that the normal return rate is 12%. The costs of
recovery are expected to be immaterial, and the textbooks are expected to be
resold at a profit.
Instructions
a. Identify the revenue recognition criteria that Uddin should employ
concerning textbook sales, and briefly discuss the reasoning for your answer.
b. On July 1, 2022, Uddin shipped books invoiced at $15,000,000 (cost
$12,000,000). Prepare the journal entry to record this transaction.
c. On October 3, 2022, $1.5 million of the invoiced July sales were returned
according to the return policy, and the remaining $13.5 million was paid.
Prepare the journal entries for the return and payment.
d. Assume Uddin prepares financial statements on October 31, 2022, the close
of the fiscal year. No other returns are anticipated. Indicate the amounts
reported on the income statement and statement of financial position related
to the above transactions.
E18.22 (LO 3) (Sales with Repurchase) Cramer AG sells idle machinery to
Enyart SE on July 1, 2022, for €40,000. Cramer agrees to repurchase this
equipment from Enyart on June 30, 2023, for a price of €42,400 (an imputed
interest rate of 6%).
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for Cramer for the transfer of the asset to Enyart
on July 1, 2022.
b. Prepare any other necessary journal entries for Cramer in 2022.
c. Prepare the journal entry for Cramer when the machinery is repurchased on
June 30, 2023.
E18.23 (LO 3) (Repurchase Agreement) Zagat Ltd. enters into an agreement
on March 1, 2022, to sell Werner Metal aluminum ingots. As part of the
agreement, Zagat also agrees to repurchase the ingots on May 1, 2022, at the
original sales price of €200,000 plus 2%.
Instructions

--- Page 1633 ---
a. Prepare Zagat’s journal entry necessary on March 1, 2022.
b. Prepare Zagat’s journal entry for the repurchase of the ingots on May 1,
2022.
E18.24 (LO 3) (Bill and Hold) Wood-Mode Company is involved in the
design, manufacture, and installation of various types of wood products for large
construction projects. Wood-Mode recently completed a large contract for
Stadium Ltd., which consisted of building 35 different types of concession
counters for a new soccer arena under construction. Under the terms of the
contract, Stadium will pay Wood-Mode £2,000,000 upon completion of the
counters. Unfortunately, due to the depressed economy, the completion of the
new soccer arena is now delayed. Stadium has therefore asked Wood-Mode to
hold the counters for 2 months at its manufacturing plant until the arena is
completed. Stadium acknowledges in writing that it ordered the counters and
now own them. The time that Wood-Mode Company must hold the counters is
totally dependent on when the arena is completed. Because Wood-Mode has not
received additional progress payments for the counters due to the delay, Stadium
has provided a deposit of £300,000.
Instructions
a. Explain this type of revenue recognition transaction.
b. What factors should be considered in determining when to recognize
revenue in this transaction?
c. Prepare the journal entry or entries that Wood-Mode should make, assuming
it signed a valid sales contract and received at the time the £300,000 deposit.
E18.25 (LO 3) (Consignment Sales) On May 3, 2022, Eisler Company
consigned 80 freezers, costing $500 each, to Remmers Company. The cost of
shipping the freezers amounted to $840 and was paid by Eisler Company. On
December 30, 2022, a report was received from the consignee, indicating that 40
freezers had been sold for $750 each. Remittance was made by the consignee for
the amount due after deducting a commission of 6%, advertising of $200, and
total installation costs of $320 on the freezers sold.
Instructions
a. Compute the inventory value of the units unsold in the hands of the
consignee.
b. Compute the profit for the consignor for the units sold.
c. Compute the amount of cash that will be remitted by the consignee.

--- Page 1634 ---
E18.26 (LO 3) (Warranty Arrangement) On January 2, 2022, Grando
Company sells production equipment to Fargo Inc. for $50,000. Grando includes
a 2-year assurance warranty with the sale of all its equipment. The customer
receives and pays for the equipment on January 2, 2022. During 2022, Grando
incurs costs related to warranties of $900. At December 31, 2022, Grando
estimates that $650 of warranty costs will be incurred in the second year of the
warranty.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record this transaction during 2022
(assuming financial statements are prepared on December 31, 2022). (Ignore
cost of goods sold.)
b. Repeat the requirements for (a), assuming that in addition to the assurance
warranty, Grando sold an extended warranty (service-type warranty) for an
additional 2 years (2024–2025) for $800.
E18.27 (LO 3) (Warranties) Celic SA manufactures and sells computers,
which include an assurance-type warranty for the first 90 days. Celic offers an
optional extended coverage plan under which it will repair or replace any
defective part for 3 years from the expiration of the assurance-type warranty.
Because the optional extended coverage plan is sold separately, Celic determines
that the 3 years of extended coverage represents a separate performance
obligation. The total transaction price for the sale of a computer and an extended
warranty is €3,600 on October 1, 2022. Celic determines the standalone selling
price of the computer and the warranty are €3,200 and €400, respectively. Based
on historical experience, Celic estimates that it will incur €200 in costs to repair
defects that arise within the 90-day coverage period for the assurance-type
warranty. The cost of the computer is €1,440. Assume that the €200 in costs to
repair defects in the computer occurred on October 25, 2022.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry or entries to record the October transactions
related to sale of the computer.
b. Briefly describe the accounting for the service-type warranty after the 90-day
assurance-type warranty period.
E18.28 (LO 4) (Existence of a Contract) On January 1, 2022, Gordon Co.
enters into a contract to sell a customer a wiring base and shelving unit that sits
on the base in exchange for $3,000. The contract requires delivery of the base
first but states that payment for the base will not be made until the shelving unit
is delivered. Gordon identifies two performance obligations and allocates $1,200

--- Page 1635 ---
of the transaction price to the wiring base and the remainder to the shelving unit.
The cost of the wiring base is $700; the shelves have a cost of $320.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for Gordon on January 1, 2022.
b. Prepare the journal entry for Gordon on February 5, 2022, when the wiring
base is delivered to the customer.
c. Prepare the journal entry for Gordon on February 25, 2022, when the
shelving unit is delivered to the customer and Gordon receives full payment.
E18.29 (LO 4) (Contract Modification) In September 2022, Gaertner Corp.
commits to selling 150 of its iPhone-compatible docking stations to Better Buy
Co. for $15,000 ($100 per product). The stations are delivered to Better Buy over
the next 6 months. After 90 stations are delivered, the contract is modified, and
Gaertner promises to deliver an additional 45 products for an additional $4,275
($95 per station). All sales are cash on delivery.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry for Gaertner for the sale of the first 90 stations.
The cost of each station is $54.
b. Prepare the journal entry for the sale of 10 more stations after the contract
modification, assuming that the price for the additional stations reflects the
standalone selling price at the time of the contract modification. In addition,
the additional stations are distinct from the original products, as Gaertner
regularly sells the products separately.
c. Prepare the journal entry for the sale of 10 more stations (as in [b]),
assuming that the pricing for the additional products does not reflect the
standalone selling price of the additional products and the prospective
method is used.
E18.30 (LO 4) (Contract Modification) Tyler Financial Services performs
bookkeeping and tax-reporting services to startup companies in the Oconomowoc
area. On January 1, 2022, Tyler entered into a 3-year service contract with
Walleye Tech. Walleye promises to pay $10,000 at the beginning of each year,
which at contract inception is the standalone selling price for these services. At
the end of the second year, the contract is modified and the fee for the third year
of services is reduced to $8,000. In addition, Walleye agrees to pay an additional
$20,000 at the beginning of the third year to cover the contract for 3 additional
years (i.e., 4 years remain after the modification). The extended contract services
are similar to those provided in the first 2 years of the contract.

--- Page 1636 ---
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries for Tyler in 2022 and 2023 related to this service
contract.
b. Prepare the journal entries for Tyler in 2024 related to the modified service
contract, assuming a prospective approach.
c. Repeat the requirements for part (b), assuming Tyler and Walleye agree on a
revised set of services (fewer bookkeeping services but more tax services) in
the extended contract period and the modification results in a separate
performance obligation.
E18.31 (LO 4) (Contract Costs) Rex’s Reclaimers entered into a contract with
Dan’s Demolition to manage the processing of recycled materials on Dan’s
various demolition projects. Services for the 3-year contract include collecting,
sorting, and transporting reclaimed materials to recycling centers or contractors
who will reuse them. Rex’s incurs selling commission costs of €2,000 to obtain
the contract. Before performing the services, Rex’s also designs and builds
receptacles and loading equipment that interface with Dan’s demolition
equipment at a cost of €27,000. These receptacles and equipment are retained by
Rex’s and can be used for other projects. Dan’s promises to pay a fixed fee of
€12,000 per year, payable every 6 months for the services under the contract.
Rex’s incurs the following costs: design services for the receptacles to interface
with Dan’s equipment €3,000, loading equipment controllers €6,000, and special
testing and inspection fees €2,000 (some of Dan’s projects are on government
property).
Instructions
a. Determine the costs that should be capitalized as part of Rex’s Reclaimers
revenue arrangement with Dan’s Demolition.
b. Dan’s also expects to incur general and administrative costs related to this
contract, as well as costs of wasted materials and labor that likely cannot be
factored into the contract price. Can these costs be capitalized? Explain.
E18.32 (LO 4) (Contract Costs, Collectibility) Refer to the information in
E18.31.
Instructions
a. Does the accounting for capitalized costs change if the contract is for 1 year
rather than 3 years? Explain.
b. Dan’s Demolition is a startup company; as a result, there is more than
insignificant uncertainty about Dan’s ability to make the 6-month payments

--- Page 1637 ---
on time. Does this uncertainty affect the amount of revenue to be recognized
under the contract? Explain.
*E18.33 (LO 5, 6) (Recognition of Profit on Long-Term Contracts)
During 2022, Nilsen Company started a construction job with a contract price of
$1,600,000. The job was completed in 2024. The following information is
available.
2022
2023
2024
Costs incurred to date
$400,000 $825,000 $1,070,000
Estimated costs to complete
600,000
275,000
–0–
Billings to date
300,000
900,000
1,600,000
Collections to date
270,000
810,000
1,425,000
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of gross profit to be recognized each year, assuming
the percentage-of-completion method is used.
b. Prepare all necessary journal entries for 2023.
c. Compute the amount of gross profit to be recognized each year, assuming
the cost-recovery method is used.
*E18.34 (LO 5) (Analysis of Percentage-of-Completion Financial
Statements) In 2022, Steinrotter Construction began construction work under a
3-year contract. The contract price was €1,000,000. Steinrotter uses the
percentage-of-completion method for financial accounting purposes. The income
to be recognized each year is based on the proportion of cost incurred to total
estimated costs for completing the contract. The financial statement
presentations relating to this contract at December 31, 2022, are shown below.
Statement of Financial Position
Accounts receivable
€18,000
Construction in process
€65,000
Less: Billings
61,500
Costs and recognized profit in excess of billings
3,500
Income Statement
Income (before tax) on the contract recognized in 2022
€19,500
Instructions
a. How much cash was collected in 2022 on this contract?

--- Page 1638 ---
b. What was the initial estimated total income before tax on this contract?
*E18.35 (LO 5) (Gross Profit on Uncompleted Contract) On April 1, 2022,
Dougherty Inc. entered into a cost plus fixed fee contract to construct an electric
generator for Altom Corporation. At the contract date, Dougherty estimated that
it would take 2 years to complete the project at a cost of $2,000,000. The fixed
fee stipulated in the contract is $450,000. Dougherty appropriately accounts for
this contract under the percentage-of-completion method. During 2022,
Dougherty incurred costs of $800,000 related to the project. The estimated cost
at December 31, 2022, to complete the contract is $1,200,000. Altom was billed
$600,000 under the contract.
Instructions
Prepare a schedule to compute the amount of gross profit to be recognized by
Dougherty under the contract for the year ended December 31, 2022. Show
supporting computations in good form.
*E18.36 (LO 5, 6) (Recognition of Revenue on Long-Term Contract and
Entries) Hamilton Construction Company uses the percentage-of-completion
method of accounting. In 2022, Hamilton began work under contract #E2-D2,
which provided for a contract price of $2,200,000. Other details follow:
2022
2023
Costs incurred during the year
$640,000 $1,425,000
Estimated costs to complete, as of December 31
960,000
–0–
Billings during the year
420,000
1,680,000
Collections during the year
350,000
1,500,000
Instructions
a. What portion of the total contract price would be recognized as revenue in
2022? In 2023?
b. Assuming the same facts as those above except that Hamilton uses the cost-
recovery method of accounting, what amount of the total contract price
would be recognized as revenue in 2023?
c. Prepare a complete set of journal entries for 2022 (using the percentage-of-
completion method).
*E18.37 (LO 5, 6) (Recognition of Profit and Statement of Financial
Position Amounts for Long-Term Contracts) Yanmei Construction
Company began operations on January 1, 2022. During the year, Yanmei
Construction entered into a contract with Lundquist Corp. to construct a

--- Page 1639 ---
manufacturing facility. At that time, Yanmei estimated that it would take 5 years
to complete the facility at a total cost of $4,500,000. The total contract price for
construction of the facility is $6,000,000. During the year, Yanmei incurred
$1,185,800 in construction costs related to the construction project. The
estimated cost to complete the contract is $4,204,200. Lundquist Corp. was billed
and paid 25% of the contract price.
Instructions
Prepare schedules to compute the amount of gross profit to be recognized for the
year ended December 31, 2022, and the amount to be shown as “costs and
recognized profit in excess of billings” or “billings in excess of costs and
recognized profit” at December 31, 2022, under each of the following methods.
Show supporting computations in good form.
a. Cost-recovery method.
b. Percentage-of-completion method.
*E18.38 (LO 8) (Franchise Entries) Pacific Crossburgers Inc. charges an
initial franchise fee of $70,000. Upon the signing of the agreement (which covers
3 years), a payment of $28,000 is due. Thereafter, three annual payments of
$14,000 are required. The credit rating of the franchisee is such that it would
have to pay interest at 10% to borrow money. The franchise agreement is signed
on May 1, 2022, and the franchise commences operation on July 1, 2022.
Instructions
Prepare the journal entries in 2022 for the franchisor under the following
assumptions. (Round to the nearest dollar.)
a. No future services are required by the franchisor once the franchise starts
operations.
b. The franchisor has substantial services to perform, once the franchise begins
operations, to maintain the value of the franchise.
c. The total franchise fee includes training services (with a value of $2,400) for
the period leading up to the franchise opening and for 2 months following
opening.
*E18.39 (LO 8) (Franchise Fee, Initial Down Payment) On January 1,
2022, Lesley Benjamin signed an agreement, covering 5 years, to operate as a
franchisee of Campbell Inc. for an initial franchise fee of $50,000. The amount of
$10,000 was paid when the agreement was signed, and the balance is payable in
five annual payments of $8,000 each, beginning January 1, 2023. The agreement
provides that the down payment is non-refundable and that no future services are

--- Page 1640 ---
required of the franchisor once the franchise commences operations on April 1,
2022. Lesley Benjamin’s credit rating indicates that she can borrow money at 11%
for a loan of this type.
Instructions
a. Prepare journal entries for Campbell for 2022-related revenue for this
franchise arrangement.
b. Prepare journal entries for Campbell for 2022-related revenue for this
franchise arrangement, assuming that in addition to the franchise rights,
Campbell also provides 1 year of operational consulting and training services,
beginning on the signing date. These services (included in the contract price)
have a value of $3,600.
c. Repeat the requirements for part (a), assuming that Campbell must provide
services to Benjamin throughout the franchise period to maintain the
franchise value.
Problems
P18.1 (LO 2, 3) (Allocate Transaction Price, Upfront Fees) Tablet Tailors
sells tablet PCs combined with Internet service, which permits the tablet to
connect to the Internet anywhere and set up a Wi-Fi hot spot. It offers two
bundles with the following terms.
1. Tablet Bundle A sells a tablet with 3 years of Internet service. The price for
the tablet and a 3-year Internet connection service contract is €500. The
standalone selling price of the tablet is €250 (the cost to Tablet Tailors is
€175). Tablet Tailors sells the Internet access service independently for an
upfront payment of €300. On January 2, 2022, Tablet Tailors signed 100
contracts, receiving a total of €50,000 in cash.
2. Tablet Bundle B includes the tablet and Internet service plus a service plan
for the tablet PC (for any repairs or upgrades to the tablet or the Internet
connections) during the 3-year contract period. That product bundle sells for
€600. Tablet Tailors provides the 3-year tablet service plan as a separate
product with a standalone selling price of €150. Tablet Tailors signed 200
contracts for Tablet Bundle B on July 1, 2022, receiving a total of €120,000
in cash.
Instructions
a. Prepare any journal entries to record the revenue arrangement for Tablet
Bundle A on January 2, 2022, and December 31, 2022.

--- Page 1641 ---
b. Prepare any journal entries to record the revenue arrangement for Tablet
Bundle B on July 1, 2022, and December 31, 2022.
c. Repeat the requirements for part (a), assuming that Tablet Tailors has no
reliable data with which to estimate the standalone selling price for the
Internet service.
P18.2 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Allocate Transaction Price, Modification of
Contract) Refer to the Tablet Bundle A revenue arrangement in P18.1. In
response to competitive pressure for Internet access for Tablet Bundle A, after 2
years of the 3-year contract, Tablet Tailors offers a modified contract and
extension incentive. The extended contract services are similar to those provided
in the first 2 years of the contract. Signing the extension and paying €90 (which
equals the standalone selling of the revised Internet service package) extends
access for 2 more years of Internet connection. Forty Tablet Bundle A customers
sign up for this offer.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries when the contract is signed on January 2, 2024,
for the 40 extended contracts. Assume the modification does not result in a
separate performance obligation.
b. Prepare the journal entries on December 31, 2024, for the 40 extended
contracts (the first year of the revised 3-year contract).
P18.3 (LO 2, 3) (Allocate Transaction Price, Discounts, Time Value)
Grill Master Company sells total outdoor grilling solutions, providing gas and
charcoal grills, accessories, and installation services for custom patio grilling
stations.
Instructions
Respond to the requirements related to the following independent revenue
arrangements for Grill Master products and services.
a. Grill Master offers contract GM205, which is comprised of a free-standing
gas grill for small patio use plus installation to a customer’s gas line for a
total price $800. On a standalone basis, the grill sells for $700 (cost $425),
and Grill Master estimates that the standalone selling price of the
installation service (based on cost-plus estimation) is $150. (The selling of
the grill and the installation services should be considered two performance
obligations.) Grill Master signed 10 GM205 contracts on April 20, 2022, and
customers paid the contract price in cash. The grills were delivered and
installed on May 15, 2022. Prepare journal entries for Grill Master for
GM205 in April and May 2022.

--- Page 1642 ---
b. The State of Kentucky is planning major renovations in its parks during 2022
and enters into a contract with Grill Master to purchase 400 durable, easy
maintenance, standard charcoal grills during 2022. The grills are priced at
$200 each (with a cost of $160 each), and Grill Master provides a 6% volume
discount if the state purchases at least 300 grills during 2022. On April 17,
2022, Grill Master delivered and received payment for 280 grills. Based on
prior experience with the State of Kentucky renovation projects, the delivery
of this many grills makes it certain that the state will meet the discount
threshold. Prepare the journal entries for Grill Master for grills sold on April
17, 2022. Assume the company records sales transaction net.
c. Grill Master sells its specialty combination gas/wood-fired grills to local
restaurants. Each grill is sold for $1,000 (cost $550) on credit with terms
3/30, net/90. Prepare the journal entries for the sale of 20 grills on
September 1, 2022, and upon payment, assuming the customer paid on (1)
September 25, 2022, and (2) October 15, 2022. Assume the company records
sales net.
d. On October 1, 2022, Grill Master sold one of its super deluxe combination
gas/charcoal grills to a local builder. The builder plans to install it in one of
its “Parade of Homes” houses. Grill Master accepted a 3-year, zero-interest-
bearing note with face amount of $5,324. The grill has an inventory cost of
$2,700. An interest rate of 10% is an appropriate market rate of interest for
this customer. Prepare the journal entries on October 1, 2022, and December
31, 2022.
P18.4 (LO 2, 3) (Allocate Transaction Price, Discounts, Time Value)
Economy Appliance Co. manufactures low-price, no-frills appliances that are in
great demand for rental units. Pricing and cost information on Economy’s main
products are as follows.
Item
Standalone 
Selling Price (Cost)
Refrigerator
$500 ($260)
Range
560
(275)
Stackable washer/dryer unit
700 (400)
Customers can contract to purchase each item individually at the stated prices or
as a three-item bundle with a price of $1,800. The bundle price includes delivery
and installation. Economy also provides installation (not a separate performance
obligation).
Instructions

--- Page 1643 ---
Respond to the requirements related to the following independent revenue
arrangements for Economy Appliance Co.
a. On June 1, 2022, Economy sold 100 washer/dryer units without installation
to Wangerin Rentals for $70,000. Wangerin is a newer customer and is
unsure how this product will work in its older rental units. Economy offers a
60-day return privilege and estimates, based on prior experience with sales
on this product, 4% of the units will be returned. Prepare the journal entries
for the sale and related cost of goods sold on June 1, 2022.
b. YellowCard Property Managers operates upscale student apartment
buildings. On May 1, 2022, Economy signs a contract with YellowCard for
300 appliance bundles to be delivered and installed in one of its new
buildings. YellowCard pays 20% cash at contract signing and will pay the
balance upon installation no later than August 1, 2022. Prepare journal
entries for Economy on (1) May 1, 2022, and (2) August 1, 2022, when all
appliances are installed.
c. Refer to the arrangement in (b). It would help YellowCard secure lease
agreements with students if the installation of the appliance bundles can be
completed by July 1, 2022. YellowCard offers a 10% bonus payment if
Economy can complete installation by July 1, 2022. Economy estimates its
chances of meeting the bonus deadline to be 90%, based on a number of
prior contracts of similar scale. Repeat the requirement for part (b), given
this bonus provision. Assume installation is completed by July 1, 2022.
d. Epic Rentals would like to take advantage of the bundle price for its 400-unit
project; on February 1, 2022, Economy signs a contract with Epic for 400
bundles. Under the agreement, Economy will hold the appliance bundles in
its warehouses until the new rental units are ready for installation. Epic pays
10% cash at contract signing. On April 1, 2022, Economy completes
manufacture of the appliances in the Epic bundle order and places them in
the warehouse. Economy and Epic have documented the warehouse
arrangement and identified the units designated for Epic. The units are ready
to ship, and Economy may not sell these units to other customers. Prepare
journal entries for Economy on (1) February 1, 2022, and (2) April 1, 2022.
P18.5 (LO 2, 3) (Allocate Transaction Price, Returns, and
Consignments) Ritt Ranch & Farm is a distributor of ranch and farm
equipment. Its products include small tools, power equipment for trench-digging
and fencing, grain dryers, and barn winches. Most products are sold direct via its
company catalog and Internet site. However, given some of its specialty products,
select farm implement stores carry Ritt’s products. Pricing and cost information
on three of Ritt’s most popular products are as follows.

--- Page 1644 ---
Item
Standalone 
Selling Price (Cost)
Mini-trencher
$ 3,600 ($2,000)
Power fence hole auger
1,200
(800)
Grain/hay dryer
14,000 (11,000)
Instructions
Respond to the requirements related to the following independent revenue
arrangements for Ritt Ranch & Farm.
a. On January 1, 2022, Ritt sells 40 augers to Mills Farm Services for $48,000.
Mills signs a 6-month note at an annual interest rate of 12%. Ritt allows
Mills to return any auger that it cannot use within 60 days and receive a full
refund. Based on prior experience, Ritt estimates that 5% of units sold to
customers like Mills will be returned (using the most likely outcome
approach). Ritt’s costs to recover the products will be immaterial, and the
returned augers are expected to be resold at a profit. Prepare the journal
entry for Ritt on January 1, 2022.
b. On August 10, 2022, Ritt sells 16 mini-trenchers to a farm co-op in western
Minnesota. Ritt provides a 4% volume discount on the mini-trenchers if the
co-op has a 15% increase in purchases from Ritt compared to the prior year.
Given a slowdown in the farm economy, sales to the co-op have been flat,
and it is highly uncertain that the benchmark will be met. Prepare the
journal entry for Ritt on August 10, 2022.
c. Ritt sells three grain/hay dryers to a local farmer at a total contract price of
$45,200. In addition to the dryers, Ritt provides installation, which has a
standalone selling price of $1,000 per unit installed. The contract payment
also includes a $1,200 maintenance plan for the dryers for 3 years after
installation. Ritt signs the contract on June 20, 2022, and receives a 20%
down payment from the farmer. The dryers are delivered and installed on
October 1, 2022, and full payment is made to Ritt. Prepare the journal entries
for Ritt in 2022 related to this arrangement.
d. On April 25, 2022, Ritt ships 100 augers to Farm Depot, a farm supply dealer
in Nebraska, on consignment. By June 30, 2022, Farm Depot has sold 60 of
the consigned augers at the listed price of $1,200 per unit. Farm Depot
notifies Ritt of the sales, retains a 10% commission, and remits the cash due
Ritt. Prepare the journal entries for Ritt and Farm Depot for the
consignment arrangement.
P18.6 (LO 3) (Warranty, Customer Loyalty Program) Hale Hardware
takes pride in being the “shop around the corner” that can compete with the big-

--- Page 1645 ---
box home improvement stores by providing good service from knowledgeable
sales associates (many of whom are retired local handymen). Hale has developed
the following two revenue arrangements to enhance its relationships with
customers, and hopes to increase its bottom line.
1. Hale sells a specialty portable winch that is popular with many of the local
customers for use at their lake homes (putting docks in and out, launching
boats, etc.). The Hale winch is a standard manufacture winch, which Hale
modifies so that it can be used for a variety of tasks. Hale sold 70 of these
winches during 2022 at a total price of $21,000, with a warranty guarantee
that the product was free of any defects. The cost of winches sold is $16,000.
The assurance warranties are for a 3-year period with an estimated cost of
$2,100. In addition, Hale sold extended warranties related to 20 Hale
winches for 2 years beyond the 3-year period for $400 each.
2. To bolster its already strong customer base, Hale implemented a customer
loyalty program that rewards a customer with 1 loyalty point for every $10 of
purchases on a select group of Hale products. Each point is redeemable for a
$1 discount on any purchases of Hale merchandise in the following 2 years.
During 2022, customers purchased select group products for $100,000 (all
products are sold to provide a 45% gross profit) and earned 10,000 points
redeemable for future purchases. The standalone selling price of the
purchased products is $100,000. Based on prior experience with incentives
programs like this, Hale expects 9,500 points to be redeemed related to these
sales (Hale appropriately uses this experience to estimate the value of future
consideration related to bonus points).
Instructions
a. Identify the separate performance obligations in the Hale warranty and
bonus point programs, and briefly explain the point in time when the
performance obligations are satisfied.
b. Prepare the journal entries for Hale related to the sales of Hale winches with
warranties.
c. Prepare the journal entries for the bonus point sales for Hale in 2022.
d. How much additional sales revenue is recognized by Hale in 2023, assuming
4,500 bonus points are redeemed?
P18.7 (LO 3) (Customer Loyalty Program) Martz SA has a customer loyalty
program that rewards a customer with 1 customer loyalty point for every €10 of
purchases. Each point is redeemable for a €3 discount on any future purchases.
On July 2, 2022, customers purchase products for €300,000 (with a cost of

--- Page 1646 ---
€171,000) and earn 30,000 points redeemable for future purchases. Martz
expects 25,000 points to be redeemed. Martz estimates a standalone selling price
of €2.50 per point (or €75,000 total) on the basis of the likelihood of redemption.
The points provide a material right to customers that they would not receive
without entering into a contract. As a result, Martz concludes that the points are a
separate performance obligation.
Instructions
a. Determine the transaction price for the product and the customer loyalty
points.
b. Prepare the journal entries to record the sale of the product and related
points on July 2, 2022.
c. At the end of the first reporting period (July 31, 2022), 10,000 loyalty points
are redeemed. Martz continues to expect 25,000 loyalty points to be
redeemed in total. Determine the amount of loyalty point revenue to be
recognized at July 31, 2022.
P18.8 (LO 2, 3) (Time Value, Gift Cards) Presented below are two
independent revenue arrangements for Colbert Company.
Instructions
Respond to the requirements related to each revenue arrangement.
a. Colbert sells 3D printer systems. Recently, Colbert provided a special
promotion of zero-interest financing for 2 years on any new 3D printer
system. Assume that Colbert sells Lyle Cartright a 3D system, receiving a
$5,000 zero-interest-bearing note on January 1, 2022. The cost of the 3D
printer system is $4,000. Colbert imputes a 6% interest rate on this zero-
interest note transaction. Prepare the journal entry to record the sale on
January 1, 2022, and compute the total amount of revenue to be recognized
in 2022.
b. Colbert sells 20 non-refundable $100 gift cards for 3D cartridges on March 1,
2022. The cartridges have a standalone selling price of $100 (cost $80). The
gift cards’ expiration date is June 30, 2022. Colbert estimates that customers
will not redeem 10% of these gift cards. The cumulative pattern of
redemption is as follows.
Redemption Total
March 31
50%
April 30
80

--- Page 1647 ---
June 30
85
Prepare the 2022 journal entries related to the gift cards at March 1, March 31,
April 30, and June 30.
*P18.9 (LO 5, 6) (Recognition of Profit on Long-Term Contract)
Shanahan Construction Company has entered into a contract beginning January
1, 2022, to build a parking complex. It has been estimated that the complex will
cost $600,000 and will take 3 years to construct. The complex will be billed to the
purchasing company at $900,000. The following data pertain to the construction
period.
2022
2023
2024
Costs to date
$270,000 $450,000 $610,000
Estimated costs to complete
330,000
150,000
–0–
Progress billings to date
270,000
550,000 900,000
Cash collected to date
240,000
500,000 900,000
Instructions
a. Using the percentage-of-completion method, compute the estimated gross
profit that would be recognized during each year of the construction period.
b. Using the cost-recovery method, compute the estimated gross profit that
would be recognized during each year of the construction period.
*P18.10 (LO 5, 6, 7) (Long-Term Contract with Interim Loss) On March
1, 2022, Pechstein Construction Company contracted to construct a factory
building for Fabrik Manufacturing Inc. for a total contract price of $8,400,000.
The building was completed by October 31, 2024. The annual contract costs
incurred, estimated costs to complete the contract, and accumulated billings to
Fabrik for 2022, 2023, and 2024 are given below.
2022
2023
2024
Contract costs incurred during the year
$2,880,000 $2,230,000 $2,190,000
Estimated costs to complete the contract at
12/31
3,520,000
2,190,000
–0–
Billings to Fabrik during the year
3,200,000
3,500,000
1,700,000
Instructions
a. Using the percentage-of-completion method, prepare schedules to compute
the profit or loss to be recognized as a result of this contract for the years
ended December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024. (Ignore income taxes.)

--- Page 1648 ---
b. Using the cost-recovery method, prepare schedules to compute the profit or
loss to be recognized as a result of this contract for the years ended
December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024. (Ignore incomes taxes.)
*P18.11 (LO 5, 6, 7) (Long-Term Contract with an Overall Loss) On July
1, 2022, Torvill Construction Company Inc. contracted to build an office building
for Gumbel Corp. for a total contract price of $1,900,000. On July 1, Torvill
estimated that it would take between 2 and 3 years to complete the building. On
December 31, 2024, the building was deemed substantially completed. Following
are accumulated contract costs incurred, estimated costs to complete the
contract, and accumulated billings to Gumbel for 2022, 2023, and 2024.
At 12/31/22 At 12/31/23 At 12/31/24
Contract costs incurred to date
$ 300,000 $1,200,000 $2,100,000
Estimated costs to complete the contract
1,200,000
800,000
–0–
Billings to Gumbel
300,000
1,100,000
1,850,000
Instructions
a. Using the percentage-of-completion method, prepare schedules to compute
the profit or loss to be recognized as a result of this contract for the years
ended December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024. (Ignore income taxes.)
b. Using the cost-recovery method, prepare schedules to compute the profit or
loss to be recognized as a result of this contract for the years ended
December 31, 2022, 2023, and 2024. (Ignore income taxes.)
*P18.12 (LO 8) (Franchise Revenue) Amigos Burrito Inc. sells franchises to
independent operators throughout the United States. The contract with a
franchisee includes the following provisions.
1. The franchisee is charged an initial fee of $120,000. Of this amount, $20,000
is payable when the agreement is signed, and a $100,000 zero-interest-
bearing note is payable with a $20,000 payment at the end of each of the 5
subsequent years. The present value of an ordinary annuity of five annual
receipts of $20,000, each discounted at 10%, is $75,816.
2. The initial franchise fee collected by Amigos is to be refunded and the
remaining obligation canceled if, for any reason, the franchisee fails to open
the franchise.
3. In return for the initial franchise fee, Amigos agrees to (a) assist the
franchisee in selecting the location for the business, (b) negotiate the lease
for the land, (c) obtain financing and assist with building design, (d)
supervise construction, (e) establish accounting and tax records, and (f)

--- Page 1649 ---
provide expert advice over a 5-year period relating to such matters as
employee and management training, quality control, and promotion. This
continuing involvement by Amigos helps maintain the brand value of the
franchise.
4. In addition to the initial franchise fee, the franchisee is required to pay to
Amigos a monthly fee of 2% of sales for menu planning, recipe innovations,
and the privilege of purchasing ingredients from Amigos at or below
prevailing market prices.
Amigos Burrito’s management estimates that the value of the services rendered
to the franchisee at the time the contract is signed is $20,000. All franchisees to
date have opened their locations at the scheduled time, and none have defaulted
on any of the notes receivable. The credit ratings of all franchisees would entitle
them to borrow at the current interest rate of 10%.
Instructions
a. Discuss the alternatives that Amigos Burrito Inc. might use to account for
the franchise fees.
b. Prepare the journal entries for the initial and continuing franchise fees,
assuming:
1. Franchise agreement is signed on January 5, 2022.
2. Amigos completes franchise startup tasks and the franchise opens on
July 1, 2022.
3. The franchisee records $260,000 in sales in the first 6 months of
operations and remits the monthly franchise fee on December 31, 2022.
c. Briefly describe the accounting for unearned franchise fees, assuming that
once the franchise opens. Amigos has little or no involvement with the
franchisee related to expert advice on employee and management training,
quality control, and promotion.
Concepts for Analysis
CA18.1 (LO 1) (Five-Step Revenue Process) Revenue is recognized based on
a five-step process that is applied to a company’s revenue arrangements.
Instructions
a. Briefly describe the five-step process.
b. Explain the importance of contracts when analyzing revenue arrangements.

--- Page 1650 ---
c. How are fair value measurement concepts applied in implementation of the
five-step process?
d. How does the five-step process reflect application of the definitions of assets
and liabilities?
CA18.2 (LO 2) (Satisfying Performance Obligations) Judy Schaeffer is
trying to understand the revenue recognition principle as it relates to the five-
step revenue recognition process.
Instructions
a. Describe the revenue recognition principle.
b. Briefly discuss how the revenue recognition principle relates to the
definitions of assets and liabilities. What is the importance of control?
c. Judy recalls that previous revenue recognition guidance required that
revenue not be recognized unless the revenue was realized or realizable (also
referred to as collectibility). Is collectibility a consideration in the
recognition of revenue? Explain.
CA18.3 (LO 2) (Recognition of Revenue—Theory) Revenue is usually
recognized at the point of sale (a point in time). Under special circumstances,
however, bases other than the point of sale are used for the timing of revenue
recognition.
Instructions
a. Why is the point of sale usually used as the basis for the timing of revenue
recognition?
b. Disregarding the special circumstances when bases other than the point of
sale are used, discuss the merits of each of the following objections to the
point-of-sale basis of revenue recognition:
1. It is too conservative because revenue is earned throughout the entire
process of production.
2. It is not conservative enough because accounts receivable do not
represent disposable funds, sales returns and allowances may be made,
and collection and bad debt expenses may be incurred in a later period.
c. Revenue may also be recognized over time. Give an example of the
circumstances in which revenue is recognized over time and accounting
merits of its use instead of the point-of-sale basis.

--- Page 1651 ---
CA18.4 (LO 2) (Recognition of Revenue—Theory) Revenue is recognized
for accounting purposes when a performance obligation is satisfied. In some
situations, revenue is recognized over time as the fair values of assets and
liabilities change. In other situations, however, accountants have developed
guidelines for recognizing revenue at the point of sale.
Instructions
(Ignore income taxes.)
a. Explain and justify why revenue is often recognized at time of sale.
b. Explain in what situations it would be appropriate to recognize revenue over
time.
CA18.5 (LO 3) (Discounts) Fahey AG sells Stairmasters to a retailer, Physical
Fitness SE, for €2,000,000. Fahey has a history of providing price concessions on
this product if the retailer has difficulty selling the Stairmasters to customers.
Fahey has experience with sales like these in the past and estimates that the
maximum amount of price concessions is €300,000.
Instructions
a. Determine the amount of revenue that Fahey should recognize for the sale of
Stairmasters to Physical Fitness SE.
b. According to IFRS, in some situations, the amount of revenue recognized
may be constrained. Explain how the accounting for the Stairmasters sales
might be affected by the revenue constraint due to variable consideration or
returns.
c. Some believe that revenue recognition should be constrained by
collectibility. Is such a view consistent with IFRS? Explain.
CA18.6 (LO 3, 4) (Recognition of Revenue from Subscriptions) Cutting
Edge is a monthly magazine that has been on the market for 18 months. It
currently has a circulation of 1.4 million copies. Negotiations are underway to
obtain a bank loan in order to update the magazine’s facilities. Cutting Edge is
producing close to capacity and expects to grow at an average of 20% per year
over the next 3 years.
After reviewing the financial statements of Cutting Edge, Andy Rich, the bank
loan officer, has indicated that a loan could be offered to Cutting Edge only if it
can increase its current ratio, and decrease its debt to equity ratio to a specified
level. Jonathan Embry, the marketing manager of Cutting Edge, devises a plan to
meet these requirements. Embry wants to initiate an advertising campaign to
immediately increase circulation. After purchasing another magazine’s mailing

--- Page 1652 ---
list, the marketing department will contact potential customers. The campaign
will include:
1. An offer to subscribe to Cutting Edge at three-fourths the normal price.
2. A special offer for all new subscribers: at any time a subscriber can request
the most current world atlas at a guaranteed price of £2.
3. An unconditional guarantee that any subscriber will receive a full refund if
dissatisfied with the magazine.
Although the offer of a full refund is risky, Embry claims that few people will ask
for a refund after receiving half of their subscription issues. Embry notes that
other magazine companies have tried this sales promotion technique and
experienced great success. The average cancellation rate has been 25%. On
average, each company increased its initial circulation threefold and in the long
run increased circulation to twice the level that existed before the promotion. In
addition, it is anticipated that 60% of the new subscribers will take advantage of
the atlas premium. Embry feels confident that the new subscriptions resulting
from the advertising campaign will increase the current ratio and decrease the
debt to equity ratio.
You are the controller of Cutting Edge and must give your opinion of the
proposed plan.
Instructions
a. When should revenue from the new subscriptions be recognized?
b. How would you classify the estimated sales returns stemming from the
unconditional guarantee?
c. How should the atlas premium be recorded? Is the estimate of premium
claims a liability? Explain.
d. Does the proposed plan achieve the goals of increasing the current ratio and
decreasing the debt to equity ratio?
CA18.7 (LO 3, 4) (Recognition of Revenue—Bonus Credits) Griseta &
Dubel Inc. was formed early this year to sell merchandise credits to merchants,
who distribute the credits free to their customers. For example, customers can
earn additional credits based on the dollars they spend with a merchant (e.g.,
airlines and hotels). Accounts for accumulating the credits, and catalogs
illustrating the merchandise for which the credits may be exchanged, are
maintained online. Centers with inventories of merchandise premiums have been
established for redemption of the credits. Merchants may not return unused
credits to Griseta & Dubel.

--- Page 1653 ---
The following schedule summarizes Griseta & Dubel’s expectations for the
percentages of a normal month’s activity, which is defined as the level of
operations expected when expansion of activities ceases or tapers off to a stable
rate. The company expects that it will reach this level in the third year and that
sales of credits will average $6,000,000 per month throughout the year.
Month
Actual
Credit Sales
Percent
Merchandise
Premium Purchases
Percent
Credit
Redemptions
Percent
6th
30%
40%
10%
12th
60
60
45
18th
80
80
70
24th
90
90
80
30th
100
100
95
Griseta & Dubel plans to adopt an annual closing date at the end of each 12
months of operation.
Instructions
a. Discuss the factors to be considered in determining when revenue should be
recognized.
b. Apply the revenue recognition factors to the Griseta & Dubel Inc. revenue
arrangement.
c. Provide statement of financial position accounts that should be used, and
indicate how each should be classified.
CA18.8 (LO 2) 
 (Revenue Recognition—Membership Fees) Muscle
Health Club (MHC) offers 1-year memberships. Membership fees are due in full
at the beginning of the individual membership period. As an incentive to new
customers, MHC advertised that any customers not satisfied for any reason could
receive a refund of the remaining portion of unused membership fees. As a result
of this policy, Richard Nies, company controller, recognized revenue ratably over
the life of the membership. MHC is in the process of preparing its year-end
financial statements. Rachel Avery, MHC’s treasurer, is concerned about the
company’s lackluster performance this year. She reviews the financial statements
Nies prepared and tells Nies to recognize membership revenue when the fees are
received.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.

--- Page 1654 ---
a. What are the ethical issues involved?
b. What should Nies do?
*CA18.9 (LO 5) 
 (Long-Term Contract—Percentage-of-
Completion) Widjaja Group is accounting for a long-term construction contract
using the percentage-of-completion method. The 4-year contract is currently in
its second year. The latest estimates of total contract costs indicate that the
contract will be completed at a profit to Widjaja Group.
Instructions
a. What is the theoretical justification for Widjaja Group’s use of the
percentage-of-completion method?
b. How would progress billings be accounted for? Include in your discussion
the classification of progress billings in Widjaja Group’s financial
statements.
c. How would the income recognized in the second year of the 4-year contract
be determined using the cost-to-cost method of determining percentage of
completion?
d. What would be the effect on earnings per share, in the first year of the 4-year
contract, of using the percentage-of-completion method instead of the cost-
recovery method? Discuss.
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The
company’s complete annual report, including the notes to the financial
statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the
following questions.
a. What were M&S’s sales for 2019?
b. What was the percentage of increase or decrease in M&S’s sales from 2018 to
2019?
c. In its notes to the financial statements, what criteria does M&S use to
recognize revenue?

--- Page 1655 ---
d. How does M&S account for discounts and loyalty schemes? Does the
accounting conform to accrual-accounting concepts? Explain.
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in
Appendices B and C, respectively. The complete annual reports, including the
notes to the financial statements, are available online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. What were adidas’s and Puma’s net revenues (sales) for the year 2018?
Which company increased its revenues more (amounts and percentage) from
2017 to 2018?
b. Are the revenue recognition policies of adidas and Puma similar? Explain.
c. In which foreign countries (geographic areas) did adidas (see Note) and
Puma experience significant revenues in 2018?
Financial Statement Analysis Case
British Airways
The following note appears in the “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”
section of the annual report of British Airways (GBR).
Summary of significant accounting policies (in part)
Revenue
Passenger and cargo revenue is recognised when the transportation service is
provided. Passenger tickets net of discounts are recorded as current liabilities in
the ‘sales in advance of carriage’ account until recognised as revenue. Unused
tickets are recognised as revenue using estimates regarding the timing of
recognition based on the terms and conditions of the ticket and historical trends.
Other revenue is recognised at the time the service is provided. Commission
costs are recognised at the same time as the revenue to which they relate and are
charged to operating expenditure.
Key accounting estimates and judgments
Passenger revenue recognition
Passenger revenue is recognised when the transportation is provided. Ticket
sales that are not expected to be used for transportation (‘unused tickets’) are

--- Page 1656 ---
recognised as revenue using estimates regarding the timing of recognition based
on the terms and conditions of the ticket and historical trends. During the
current year, changes in estimates regarding the timing of revenue recognition
primarily for unused flexible tickets were made, resulting in increased revenue
in the current year of £109 million. During the prior year, changes in estimates
regarding the timing of revenue recognition for unused restricted tickets were
made, resulting in increased revenue in the prior year of £36 million. Both the
above changes reflect more accurate and timely data obtained through the
increased use of electronic tickets.
Instructions
a. Identify the revenue recognition policies used by British Airways as
discussed in its note on significant accounting policies.
b. Under what conditions are the revenue recognition methods identified in the
first paragraph of British Airways’ note acceptable?
c. From the information provided in the second paragraph of British Airways’
note, identify the type of operation being described and defend the
acceptability of the revenue recognition method.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Diversified Industries manufactures sump-pumps. Its most popular product is
called the Super Soaker, which has a retail price of $1,200 and costs $540 to
manufacture. It sells the Super Soaker on a standalone basis directly to
businesses. Diversified also provides installation services for these commercial
customers, who want an emergency pumping capability (with regular and back-
up generator power) at their businesses. Diversified also distributes the Super
Soaker through a consignment agreement with Menards. Income data for the
first quarter of 2022 from operations other than the Super Soaker are as follows.
Revenues $9,500,000
Expenses
7,750,000
Diversified has the following information related to two Super Soaker revenue
arrangements during the first quarter of 2022.
1. Diversified sells 30 Super Soakers to businesses in flood-prone areas for a
total contract price of $54,600. As part of the contract, Diversified also
provides installation (at a cost of $150 per pump). On a standalone basis, the
fair value of this service is $200 per unit installed. The contract payment also
includes a $10 per month service plan for the pumps for 3 years after
installation (Diversified’s cost to provide this service is $7 per month). The

--- Page 1657 ---
Super Soakers are delivered and installed on March 1, 2022, and full payment
is made to Diversified. Any discount is applied to the pump/installation
bundle.
2. Diversified ships 300 Super Soakers to Menards on consignment. By March
31, 2022, Menards has sold two-thirds of the consigned merchandise at the
listed price of $1,200 per unit. Menards notifies Diversified of the sales,
retains a 5% commission, and remits the cash due Diversified.
Accounting
Determine Diversified Industries’ 2022 first-quarter net income. (Ignore taxes.)
Analysis
Determine free cash flow (see Chapter 5) for Diversified Industries for the first
quarter of 2022. In the first quarter, Diversified had depreciation expense of
$175,000 and a net increase in working capital (change in accounts receivable
and accounts payable) of $250,000. In the first quarter, capital expenditures were
$500,000; Diversified paid dividends of $120,000.
Principles
Explain how the five-step revenue recognition process, when applied to
Diversified’s two revenue arrangements, reflects the concept of control in the
definition of an asset and trade-offs between relevance and faithful
representation.
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014).
[2] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), Introduction.
[3] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 9–12.
[4] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 23.
[5] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 47–49.
[6] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 73–80.

--- Page 1658 ---
[7] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 9(e).
[8] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 47–49.
[9] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 50–54.
[10] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 57.
[11] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 56.
[12] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 63.
[13] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 57.
[14] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 38.
[15] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. B70.
[16] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. B79–B82.
[17] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. B34–B38.
[18] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 20.
[19] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. 21.
[20] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 9, 31, B10.
[21] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 110–129.
[22] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. 35–37.
[23] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), par. BC296.

--- Page 1659 ---
[24] International Financial Reporting Standard 15, Revenue from Contracts
with Customers (London, U.K.: IFRS Foundation, May 2014), paras. B52–B56.
Research Case
Employees at your company disagree about the accounting for sales returns. The
sales manager believes that granting more generous return provisions and
allowing customers to order items on a bill-and-hold basis can give the company
a competitive edge and increase sales revenue. The controller cautions that,
depending on the terms granted, generous return or bill-and-hold provisions
might lead to challenges to revenue recognition under IFRS. The company CFO
would like you to research the issue to provide an authoritative answer.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for
free IFRS access at this site). Under the Standards Development tab, click on
Work plan for IFRS and go to Revenue Recognition. Click on “Summary of Board
Deliberations.” When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search
tool in your Internet browser to respond to the following questions. (Provide
paragraph citations.)
a. What is the authoritative literature addressing revenue recognition when
right of return exists?
b. What is meant by “right of return”? “Bill and hold”?
c. Describe the accounting when there is a right of return.
d. When goods are sold on a bill-and-hold basis, what conditions must be met
to recognize revenue upon receipt of the order?
Notes
1 See, for example, “Preliminary Views on Revenue Recognition in Contracts with
Customers,” IASB/FASB Discussion Paper (December 19, 2008). Some noted
that U.S. GAAP has so many standards that at times they are inconsistent with
each other in applying basic principles. In addition, even with the many
standards, no comprehensive guidance was provided for service transactions.
Conversely, IFRS lacked guidance in certain fundamental areas, such as
multiple-deliverable arrangements. In addition, there were inconsistencies in
applying revenue recognition principles to long-term contracts versus other
elements of revenue recognition.
2 BEAN disregards revenue guidance for a contract that is wholly unperformed
and for which each party can unilaterally terminate the contract without

--- Page 1660 ---
compensation.
3 We provide expanded discussion and examples of variation in transaction price,
including variable consideration, later in the chapter.
4 While in the BEAN example, recognition occurred at a point in time, in certain
cases companies satisfy performance obligations over a period of time. We
address the criteria for determining point-in-time versus over-time recognition
later in the chapter.
5 A valid contract exists when (1) the contract has commercial substance, (2) the
parties have approved the contract, (3) the contract identifies the rights of the
parties, (4) payment terms are identified, and (5) it is probable that the
consideration will be collected. The IASB included this last criterion (which
acts like a collectibility threshold) because the Board concluded that the
assessment of a customer’s credit risk was important to determine whether a
contract is valid. That is, under the revenue standard (discussed later in the
chapter), collectibility is not a consideration for determining whether revenue
is recognized. However, collectibility may be a consideration in assessing
whether parties to the contract are committed to perform. In determining
whether it is probable that a company will collect the amount of consideration
to which it is entitled, the company assesses both the customer’s ability and
intent to pay as amounts become due. [7]
6 In practice, determining whether multiple performance obligations exist can be
complex. Indicators that help to understand whether performance obligations
should be accounted for separately are (1) the performance obligations have a
standalone selling price and (2) the goods or services are not highly
interdependent or interrelated. For homework purposes, you need to
determine the objective of the transaction. If the objective is to transfer
individual goods or services, then account for these performance obligations
separately.
7 Conditions such as one of the following would indicate that the revenue is
constrained (or not recognized):
1. The amount of consideration is highly susceptible to factors outside the
company’s influence. Factors include volatility in a market, the judgment
of third parties, weather conditions, and a high risk of obsolescence of the
promised good or service.
2. The uncertainty about the amount of consideration is not expected to be
resolved for a long period of time.
3. The company’s experience (or other evidence) with similar types of
performance obligations is limited.

--- Page 1661 ---
4. The contract has a large number and broad range of possible consideration
amounts. [10]
8 A selling price is highly variable when a company sells the same good or service
to different customers (at or near the same time) for a broad range of
amounts. A selling price is uncertain when a company has not yet established
a price for a good or service and the good or service has not previously been
sold. [13]
9 As indicated, at the date of sale, both sales revenue and accounts receivable are
recorded at their gross amounts without consideration of sales returns and
allowances. Then, at the end of the reporting period, adjusting entries are
made, resulting in both sales revenues and accounts receivable being reported
at net amounts, and which reflect actual and estimated returns and
allowances. As discussed in Chapter 7, most companies follow this adjusting
entry approach because estimating net sales at the date of sale is often difficult
and time-consuming. In addition, recording accounts receivables net at the
sale date may lead to a lack of correspondence between the control account
and the subsidiary ledger related to accounts receivable. By waiting to make
the necessary adjusting entries at the end of the reporting period, information
related to actual sales returns and allowances is available, and a company still
achieves the IASB’s objective of reflecting accounts receivable and sales
revenue at the amount the company is entitled to receive (and inventories and
cost of goods sold at cost).
10 Beyond financing motivations, a company may transfer inventory to another
party on a short-term basis to avoid inventory taxes. If the counterparty is able
to use the inventory during the transfer period, the transaction may more
appropriately be accounted for as a rental agreement.
11 If the repurchase price is less than the selling price, then the transaction is
accounted for as a lease. [15] The accounting for leases is discussed in Chapter
21.
12 Indicators that the company’s performance obligation is to arrange for the
providing of goods or the performing of services by another party (i.e., the
company is an agent and should recognize revenue in the net amount) include
the following: (a) the other party is primarily responsible for fulfilling the
contract; (b) the company does not have inventory risk before or after the
customer order, during shipping, or on return; and (c) the company does not
have latitude in establishing prices for the other party’s goods or services and,
hence, the benefit that the company can receive from those goods or services
is constrained. [17]

--- Page 1662 ---
13 As with the accounting for sales returns and allowances, the entries shown
here reflect a gross (as opposed to net) treatment of the warranty obligation.
That is, at the date of sale, Maverick recorded sales with an assurance warranty
at the gross amount, without adjustment for expected warranty costs
(sometimes referred to as the expense warranty approach). Then at the end of
the accounting period when financial statements are prepared, Maverick
prepares adjusting entries to record a liability for any remaining estimated
warranty expenses (after accounting for actual warranty expenditures).
Companies generally do not use the net method because it requires additional
analysis and bookkeeping to adjust the warranty liability for unused warranty
claims.
14 The initiation fee might be viewed as a separate performance obligation (it
provides a renewal option at a lower price than normally charged, perhaps with
different services). In this situation, in the first period, Bigelow would report
revenue of £600 (£50 × 12). The initiation fee would then be allocated to years
two and three (£100 in each year) unless forfeited earlier.
15 Another approach to account for a contract modification is to report the
information in a cumulative catch-up manner. In other words, assuming that
these new products are part of the original contract, companies adjust the
revenue account to reflect the cumulative effect for periods prior to when the
modification occurred. An example of a catch-up situation is a long-term
construction contract, which is discussed in more detail in Appendix 18A. Use
of the prospective approach avoids the complexity of opening up the
accounting for previously satisfied performance obligations. However, it
ignores any adjustments to revenue that have already been recognized. [19]
For homework purposes, unless instructed otherwise, use the prospective
approach for modifications that do not result in a separate performance
obligation. Expanded discussion of the prospective and cumulative catch-up
(retrospective) approaches to accounting changes is provided in Chapter 22.
16 See PricewaterhouseCoopers Dataline 2013–2014.
17 The right to payment for performance completed to date does not need to be
for a fixed amount. However, the company must be entitled to an amount that
would compensate the company for performance completed to date (even if
the customer can terminate the contract for reasons other than the company’s
failure to perform as promised). Compensation for performance completed to
date includes payment that approximates the selling price of the goods or
services transferred to date (for example, recovery of the company’s costs plus
a reasonable profit margin).

--- Page 1663 ---
18 The accounting for losses reflects application of the accounting for onerous
contracts. [23]
19 In 2024, Hardhat Construction will recognize the remaining 33½ percent of
the revenue (£1,507,500), with costs of £1,468,962 as expected, and will report
a gross profit of £38,538. The total gross profit over the three years of the
contract would be £115,038 [£125,000 (2022) − £48,500 (2023) + £38,538
(2024)]. This amount is the difference between the total contract revenue of
£4,500,000 and the total contract costs of £4,384,962.
20 If the costs in 2024 are £1,640,250 as projected, at the end of 2024 the
Construction in Process account will have a balance of £1,640,250 +
£2,859,750, or £4,500,000, equal to the contract price. When the company
records the revenue remaining to be recognized in 2024 of £1,620,000
[£4,500,000 (total contract price) − £1,125,000 (2022) − £1,755,000 (2023)]
with the construction expense to be recognized in 2024 of £1,620,000 [total
costs of £4,556,250 less the total costs recognized in prior years of £2,936,250
(2022, £1,000,000; 2023, £1,936,250)], a zero profit results. Thus, the total
loss has been recognized in 2023, the year in which it first became evident.
21 Franchises are an example of a license, or a similar right, to use intellectual
property. In such arrangements, a company grants a customer the right to use,
but not own, intellectual property of the company. Other examples of
intellectual property include (1) software and technology; (2) motion pictures,
music, and other forms of media and entertainment; and (3) patents,
trademarks, and copyrights. Generally, revenue is recognized in these
situations when the customer obtains control of the rights. In some cases, a
license is a promise to provide a right, which transfers to the customer at a
point in time. In other cases, a license is a promise to provide access to an
entity’s intellectual property, which transfers benefits to the customer over
time. [24]
Sources: Cheryl de Mesa Graziano, “Revenue Recognition: A Perennial Problem,” Financial Executive,
www.fei.org/mag/articles/7-2005_revenue.cfm, (July 14, 2005); S. Taub, “SEC Accuses Ex-CFO of
Channel Stuffing,” CFO.com (September 30, 2006); B. Elder, “Rolls-Royce Hit by Accounting Concerns,”
Financial Times (February 18, 2014); W. Ma, “China Securities Regulator Probes Sinovel Wind Group,”
Wall Street Journal (January 13, 2014); “Turquoise Hill Announces Restatement of Previously Reported
Financial Results,” www.marketwired.com (November 8, 2013); and Audit Analytics, “An Updated
Overview of KAMs,” AuditAnalytics.com (December 20, 2019).

--- Page 1664 ---
