CHAPTER 5
Statement of Financial Position and Statement of Cash Flows
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Explain the uses, limitations, and content of the statement of financial position.
2. Prepare a classified statement of financial position.
3. Explain the purpose, content, and preparation of the statement of cash flows.
4. Describe additional types of information provided.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are integral to the
topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 5
As the following opening story indicates, the IASB is currently working to improve the
presentation of financial information on the statement of financial position, as well as other
financial statements. In this chapter, we examine the many different types of assets, liabilities,
and equity items that affect the statement of financial position and the statement of cash flows.
The content and organization of the chapter are as follows.
Hey, It Doesn’t Balance!
A good accounting student knows by now that Total Assets = Total Liabilities + Total Equity. From this
equation, we can also determine net assets, which are determined as follows: Total Assets − Total
Liabilities = Net Assets. O.K., this is simple so far. But let’s look at the discussion paper by the IASB on
how the statement of financial position (often referred to as the balance sheet) should be structured.
The statement of financial position is divided into five major parts, with many assets and liabilities
netted against one another. Here is the general framework for the new statement of financial position:
Business
Operating assets and liabilities
Investing assets and liabilities
Financing
Financing assets

--- Page 380 ---
Financing liabilities
Income Taxes
Discontinued Operations
Equity
The new statement looks a bit different than the traditional one. And although it does balance—in that
net assets equal equity (as shown in the following example)—isn’t it important to know total assets and
total liabilities?
Statement of Financial Position
Business
Operating
Inventories
€ 400,000
Receivables
200,000
Total short-term assets
€
600,000
Property (net)
500,000
Intangible assets
50,000
Total long-term assets
550,000
Accounts payable
30,000
Wages payable
40,000
Total short-term liabilities
(70,000)
Lease liability
10,000
Other long-term debt
35,000
Total long-term liabilities
(45,000)
Net operating assets
1,035,000
Investing
Trading securities
45,000
Other securities
5,000
Total investing assets
50,000
Total net business assets
1,085,000
Financing
Financing assets
Cash
30,000
Total financing assets
30,000
Financing liabilities
Short- and long-term borrowing
130,000
Total financing liabilities
130,000
Net financing liabilities
100,000
Income Taxes
Deferred income taxes
70,000
Discontinued Operations
Assets held for sale
420,000
Net assets
€1,475,000

--- Page 381 ---
Equity
Share capital—ordinary
€1,000,000
Retained earnings
475,000
Total equity
€1,475,000
As some have observed, the statement of financial position will not balance the way we expect it to.
That is, assets won’t equal liabilities and equity. This is because the assets and liabilities are grouped
into the business, financing, discontinued operations, and income taxes categories. This new model
raises a number of questions, such as:
Does separating “business activities” from “financing activities” provide information that is more
decision-useful?
Does information on income taxes and discontinued operations merit separate categories?
As discussed in Chapter 4, although the original comprehensive financial statement presentation
project has been on hold, the IASB may at some time restart this project to get answers to the
questions above. Indeed, as part of its research on the statement of financial position, the IASB found
good comparability in the structure and the content of the statement of financial position but noted
that companies are not presenting sufficient detail or note disclosure, to the extent that there may be
merit in tweaking current reporting requirements to meet the IFRS objective for the statement of
financial position. And while the IASB has an active project on performance reporting (see the IFRS
website for more information), market analysts are keenly aware of the content in the statement of
financial position—in whatever form—as an important input for assessing overall accounting quality.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted summary review
and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well
as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Statement of Financial Position
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Explain the uses, limitations, and content of the statement of financial position.
The statement of financial position, also referred to as the balance sheet, reports the assets,
liabilities, and equity of a business enterprise at a specific date.1 This financial statement provides
information about the nature and amounts of investments in enterprise resources, obligations to
creditors, and the equity in net resources. It therefore helps in predicting the amounts, timing, and
uncertainty of future cash flows.
Usefulness of the Statement of Financial Position
By providing information on assets, liabilities, and equity, the statement of financial position provides
a basis for computing rates of return and evaluating the capital structure of the enterprise. Analysts
also use information in the statement of financial position to assess a company’s risk2 and future cash
flows. In this regard, analysts use the statement of financial position to assess a company’s liquidity,
solvency, and financial flexibility.
Liquidity describes “the amount of time that is expected to elapse until an asset is realized or
otherwise converted into cash or until a liability has to be paid.” Creditors are interested in short-term
liquidity ratios, such as the ratio of cash (or near cash) to short-term liabilities. These ratios indicate

--- Page 382 ---
whether a company, like adidas (DEU), will have the resources to pay its current and maturing
obligations. Similarly, shareholders assess liquidity to evaluate the possibility of future cash dividends
or the buyback of shares. In general, the greater adidas’s liquidity, the lower its risk of failure.
Solvency refers to the ability of a company to pay its debts as they mature. For example, when a
company carries a high level of long-term debt relative to assets, it has lower solvency than a similar
company with a low level of long-term debt. Companies with higher debt are relatively more risky
because they will need more of their assets to meet their fixed obligations (interest and principal
payments).
Liquidity and solvency affect a company’s financial flexibility, which measures the ability of a
company to take effective actions to alter the amounts and timing of cash flows so it can respond to
unexpected needs and opportunities. For example, a company may become so loaded with debt—so
financially inflexible—that it has little or no sources of cash to finance expansion or to pay off maturing
debt. A company with a high degree of financial flexibility is better able to survive bad times, to recover
from unexpected setbacks, and to take advantage of profitable and unexpected investment
opportunities. Generally, the greater an enterprise’s financial flexibility, the lower its risk of failure.
Limitations of the Statement of Financial Position
Some of the major limitations of the statement of financial position are:

--- Page 383 ---
1. Most assets and liabilities are reported at historical cost. As a result, the information provided in
the statement of financial position is often criticized for not reporting a more relevant fair value.
For example, Pemex (MEX) owns crude oil and natural gas that may appreciate in value. Yet, it
reports any increase only if and when it sells the assets.
2. Companies use judgments and estimates to determine many of the items reported in the
statement of financial position. For example, in its statement of financial position, Lenovo (CHN)
estimates the amount of receivables that it will collect, the useful life of its warehouses, and the
number of computers that will be returned under warranty.
3. The statement of financial position necessarily omits many items that are of financial value
but that a company cannot record objectively. For example, the knowledge and skill of Intel (USA)
employees in developing new computer chips are arguably the company’s most significant asset.
However, because Intel cannot reliably measure the value of its employees and other intangible
assets (such as customer base, research superiority, and reputation), it does not recognize these
items in the statement of financial position. Similarly, many liabilities are reported in an “off-
balance-sheet” manner, if at all.
The bankruptcy of Enron (USA), the seventh-largest U.S. company at the time, highlights the
omission of important items in the statement of financial position. In Enron’s case, it failed to disclose
certain off-balance-sheet financing obligations in its main financial statements.
Classification in the Statement of Financial Position
Statement of financial position accounts are classified. That is, a statement of financial position
groups together similar items to arrive at significant subtotals. Furthermore, the material is arranged
so that important relationships are shown.
The IASB indicates that the parts and subsections of financial statements are more informative than
the whole. Therefore, the IASB discourages the reporting of summary accounts alone (total assets, net
assets, total liabilities, etc.). Instead, companies should report and classify individual items in
sufficient detail to permit users to assess the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
Such classification also makes it easier for users to evaluate the company’s liquidity and financial
flexibility, profitability, and risk.
To classify items in financial statements, companies group those items with similar characteristics and
separate items with different characteristics. For example, companies should report separately:
1. Assets and liabilities with different general liquidity characteristics. For example, Nokia
(FIN) reports cash separately from inventories.
2. Assets that differ in their expected function in the company’s central operations or other
activities. For example, Puma (DEU) reports merchandise inventories separately from property,
plant, and equipment. Similarly, a company like Marks and Spencer plc (GBR) that uses assets

--- Page 384 ---
in its operations should report these assets differently from assets held for investments and assets
subject to restrictions, such as leased facilities.
3. Liabilities that differ in their amounts, nature, and timing. For example, Ahold Delhaize
(NLD/BEL) should report accounts payable separately from its pension liability.
The three general classes of items included in the statement of financial position are assets, liabilities,
and equity. We defined them in Chapter 2 as follows.3
Elements of the Statement of Financial Position
1. Asset. A present economic resource controlled by the entity as a result of past events (an
economic resource is a right that has the potential to produce economic benefits).
2. Liability. A present obligation of the entity to transfer an economic resource as a result of
past events.
3. Equity. The residual interest in the assets of the entity after deducting all its liabilities.
Companies then further divide these items into several subclassifications. Illustration 5.1 indicates
the general format of statement of financial position presentation.
Assets
Equity and Liabilities
Non-current assets
Equity
Investments
Share capital
Property, plant, and equipment
Share premium
Intangible assets
Retained earnings
Other assets
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Current assets
Non-controlling interest
Non-current liabilities
Current liabilities
ILLUSTRATION 5.1 Statement of Financial Position Classification

--- Page 385 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
What Comes First?
There is much discussion involving the format of the financial statements. An interesting
question is whether current assets or non-current assets should be shown first on the statement
of financial position. One survey of 175 international companies shows the following order in
which assets are presented.
Format of Statement of Financial Position
Classified
Number of
Companies*
Current assets, non-current assets, current liabilities, non-current
liabilities, equity
84
Non-current assets, current assets, equity, non-current liabilities, current
liabilities
54
Non-current assets, current assets, current liabilities, non-current
liabilities, equity
16
Non-current assets, current assets, non-current liabilities, current
liabilities, equity
0
*Of the 175 companies surveyed.
This survey shows that companies appear to favor reporting current assets first on the statement
of financial position. Recognize that companies are required to present a classified statement of
financial position except when one based on liquidity provides more relevant information.
Therefore, either current assets or non-current assets can be shown first. The important point is
that financial statement users have a good understanding of what is going to be realized in cash in
the short-term versus the long-term.
Source: Adapted from P. Walters, “IFRS Financial Statements,” Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: AICPA), p.
117.
Non-Current Assets
Current assets are cash and other assets a company expects to convert to cash, sell, or consume either
in one year or the operating cycle, whichever is longer. Non-current assets are those not meeting the
definition of current assets. They include a variety of items, as we discuss in the following sections.
Long-Term Investments
Long-term investments, often referred to simply as investments, normally consist of one of four
types:
1. Investments in securities, such as bonds, ordinary shares, or long-term notes.
2. Investments in tangible assets not currently used in operations, such as land held for speculation.
3. Investments set aside in special funds, such as a sinking fund, pension fund, or plant expansion
fund.
4. Investments in non-consolidated subsidiaries or associated companies.
Companies group investments in debt and equity securities into three separate portfolios for valuation
and reporting purposes:

--- Page 386 ---
Held-for-collection: Debt securities that a company manages to collect contractual principal
and interest payments.
Trading: Debt and equity securities bought and held primarily for sale in the near term to
generate income on short-term price changes.
Non-trading equity: Certain equity securities held for purposes other than trading (e.g., to meet
a legal or contractual requirement).
We further discuss the held-for-collection and non-trading equity investments in Chapter 17.4
A company should report trading securities (whether debt or equity) as current assets. It classifies
individual held-for-collection and non-trading equity securities as current or non-current, depending
on the circumstances. It should report held-for-collection securities at amortized cost. All trading and
non-trading equity securities are reported at fair value. [3]
Christian Dior (FRA) reported its investments as shown in Illustration 5.2.
Christian Dior
(in millions)
Investments in joint ventures and associates € 638
Non-current financial assets
3,481
ILLUSTRATION 5.2 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Long-Term
Investments
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Property, plant, and equipment are tangible, long-lived assets used in the regular operations of the
business. These assets consist of physical property such as land, buildings, machinery, furniture, tools,
and wasting resources (minerals). With the exception of land, a company either depreciates (e.g.,
buildings) or depletes (e.g., oil reserves) these assets.
ÆON Co. Ltd. (JPN) presented its property, plant, and equipment in its statement of financial
position as shown in Illustration 5.3.

--- Page 387 ---
ÆON Co. Ltd.
(in millions)
Property, Buildings and Equipment
Land
¥ 828,326
Buildings and Structures
1,529,041
Furniture and Fixtures
228,380
Vehicles
459
Lease Assets
75,653
Construction in Progress
93,251
¥2,755,110
Summary of Significant Accounting Policy
Property, buildings, and equipment—Property, buildings, and equipment are stated at cost.
Depreciation of property, buildings, and equipment is computed under the straight-line method based
on the estimated useful lives of the assets. The range of useful lives is principally from 20 to 39 years
for store buildings, from 38 to 50 years for office buildings, from 3 to 20 years for structures, from 2
to 20 years for furniture and fixtures, and from 4 to 6 years for vehicles. Accumulated depreciation of
property, buildings, and equipment at year-end was ¥2,282,350 million.
ILLUSTRATION 5.3 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Property, Plant,
and Equipment
A company discloses the basis it uses to value property, plant, and equipment; any liens against the
properties; and accumulated depreciation—usually in the notes to the statements.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets lack physical substance and are not financial instruments.5 These identifiable
assets include patents, copyrights, franchises, trademarks, trade names, and customer lists. A company
writes off (amortizes) limited-life intangible assets over the lesser of legal life or their useful lives. It
periodically assesses indefinite-life intangibles (such as certain trade names) for impairment.
Intangibles can represent significant economic resources, yet financial analysts often ignore them,
because valuation is difficult. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred except for
certain development costs, which are capitalized when it is probable that a development project will
generate future economic benefits.
Nokia (FIN) reported intangible assets in its statement of financial position as shown in Illustration
5.4.

--- Page 388 ---
Nokia Corporation
(in millions)
Goodwill
€5,452
Other intangible assets
3,353
Total intangibles
€8,805
ILLUSTRATION 5.4 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Intangible Assets
Other Assets
The items included in the section “Other assets” vary widely in practice. Some include items such as
long-term prepaid expenses and non-current receivables. Other items that might be included are assets
in special funds, property held for sale, and restricted cash or securities. A company should limit this
section to include only unusual items sufficiently different from assets included in specific categories.
Current Assets
As indicated earlier, current assets are cash and other assets a company expects to convert
into cash, sell, or consume either in one year or in the operating cycle, whichever is
longer.6 The operating cycle is the average time between when a company acquires materials and
supplies and when it receives cash for sales of the product (for which it acquired the materials and
supplies). The cycle operates from cash through inventory, production, receivables, and back to cash.
When several operating cycles occur within one year (which is generally the case for service
companies), a company uses the one-year period. If the operating cycle is more than one year, a
company uses the longer period.
The five major items found in the current assets section, and their bases of valuation, are shown in
Illustration 5.5. These assets are generally presented in the following order.
Item
Basis of Valuation
Inventories
Lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value
Prepaid expenses
Cost
Receivables
Estimated amount collectible
Short-term investments
Generally, fair value
Cash and cash equivalents Fair value
ILLUSTRATION 5.5 Current Assets and Basis of Valuation
A company does not report these five items as current assets if it does not expect to realize them in one
year or in the operating cycle, whichever is longer. For example, a company excludes from the current
assets section cash restricted for purposes other than payment of current obligations or for use in
current operations. Generally, if a company expects to convert an asset into cash or to use it
to pay a current liability within a year or the operating cycle, whichever is longer, it
classifies the asset as current.
This rule, however, is subject to interpretation. A company classifies an investment in non-trading
equity securities as either a current asset or a non-current asset, depending on management’s intent.
When it has holdings of ordinary or preference shares that it will hold long-term, it should not classify
them as current.

--- Page 389 ---
Although a current asset is well defined, certain theoretical problems also develop. For example, how is
inclusion of prepaid expenses in the current assets section justified? The rationale is that if a company
did not pay these items in advance, it would instead need to use other current assets during the
operating cycle. If we follow this logic to its ultimate conclusion, however, any asset previously
purchased saves the use of current assets during the operating cycle and would be considered current.
Another problem occurs in the current-asset definition when a company consumes plant assets during
the operating cycle. Conceptually, it seems that a company should place in the current assets section an
amount equal to the current depreciation charge on the plant assets, because it will consume them in
the next operating cycle. However, this conceptual problem is ignored. This example illustrates that the
formal distinction made between some current and non-current assets is somewhat arbitrary.
Inventories
To present inventories properly, a company discloses the basis of valuation (e.g., lower-of-cost-or-net
realizable value) and the cost flow assumption used (e.g., FIFO or average-cost). Illustration 5.6
shows how Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL) reports its inventories.
Ahold Delhaize
(in millions)
Current assets
Inventories (Note 16)
€3,196
Note 16
Inventories are stated at cost or net realizable value, whichever is lower. Cost consists of all costs of
purchase, cost of conversion and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present
location and condition, net of vendor allowances attributable to inventories. The cost of inventories is
determined using either the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method or the weighted average cost method,
depending on their nature or use. For certain inventories, cost is measured using the retail method,
whereby the sales value of the inventories is reduced by the appropriate percentage gross margin. Net
realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less the estimated
marketing, distribution, and selling expenses.
ILLUSTRATION 5.6 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Inventories
A manufacturing company, like Acer Incorporated (TWN), also indicates the stage of completion for
inventory, as shown in Illustration 5.7. Note that Acer shows amounts both in New Taiwan dollars
(NT$) and U.S. dollars ($).

--- Page 390 ---
Acer Incorporated
(in millions)
Current assets
Inventories (Note 7)
NT$ 40,028,195 $1,219,702
Note 7
Inventories
NT$
US$
Raw materials
14,528,727
442,706
Work in process
49,437
1,506
Finished goods
16,907,906
515,202
Spare parts
4,544,547
138,477
Inventories in transit
9,233,802
281,364
Less: provision for inventory obsolescence and net realizable value
(5,236,224)
(159,553)
40,028,195
1,219,702
ILLUSTRATION 5.7 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Inventories
Receivables
A company should clearly identify any anticipated loss due to uncollectible accounts, the amount and
nature of any non-trade receivables, and any receivables used as collateral. Major categories of
receivables should be shown in the statement of financial position or the related notes. For receivables
arising from unusual transactions (such as sale of property, or a loan to associates or employees),
companies should separately classify these as long-term, unless collection is expected within one year.
RELX Group (GBR) reported its receivables as shown in Illustration 5.8.

--- Page 391 ---
RELX Group
(in millions)
Current assets
Trade and other receivables
Note 20
€2,015
Note 20 Trade and other receivables
Trade receivables
€ 1,829
Allowance for doubtful debts
(87)
1,742
Prepayments and accrued income
224
Net finance lease receivable
49
Total
€2,015
Trade receivables are predominantly non-interest bearing and their carrying amounts approximate
their fair value.
ILLUSTRATION 5.8 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Receivables
Prepaid Expenses
A company includes prepaid expenses in current assets if it will receive benefits (usually services)
within one year or the operating cycle, whichever is longer. As we discussed earlier, these items are
current assets because if they had not already been paid, they would require the use of cash during the
next year or the operating cycle. A company reports prepaid expenses at the amount of the unexpired or
unconsumed cost.
A common example is the prepayment for an insurance policy. A company classifies it as a prepaid
expense because the payment precedes the receipt of the benefit of coverage. Other common prepaid
expenses include prepaid rent, advertising, taxes, and office or operating supplies. adidas (DEU)
reports prepaid expenses in other current assets, along with tax receivables other than income taxes
and derivative financial assets, as shown in Illustration 5.9.

--- Page 392 ---
adidas
(in millions)
Other current assets
Note 11 €725
Note 11 Other current assets
Other current assets consist of the following:
Prepaid expenses
€242
Tax receivables other than income taxes
124
Return assets
258
Sundry
107
Other current assets, gross
731
Less: accumulated allowances
(6)
Other current assets, net
€725
ILLUSTRATION 5.9 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Prepaid Expenses
Short-Term Investments
As indicated earlier, a company should report trading securities (whether debt or equity) as current
assets. It classifies individual non-trading investments as current or non-current, depending on the
circumstances. It should report held-for-collection securities at amortized cost. All trading securities
are reported at fair value.7
Illustration 5.10 provides an excerpt from the annual report of AB InBev (BEL) with respect to its
short-term financial assets.
AB InBev
(in millions)
Investment securities (Note 17)
€87
Note 17
Current investments
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss €87
ILLUSTRATION 5.10 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Short-Term
Investments
Cash
Cash is generally considered to consist of currency and demand deposits (monies available on demand
at a financial institution). Cash equivalents are short-term, highly liquid investments that will
mature within three months or less. Most companies use the caption “Cash and cash equivalents,” and

--- Page 393 ---
they indicate that this amount approximates fair value. As an example, see the excerpt from adidas
(DEU) in Illustration 5.11.
adidas
(in millions)
Cash (Note 6)
€2,629
Note 6 Cash and cash equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of cash at banks and on hand as well as short-term bank deposits.
ILLUSTRATION 5.11 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Cash and Cash
Equivalents
A company must disclose any restrictions or commitments related to the availability of cash. If a
company restricts cash for purposes other than current obligations, it excludes the cash from current
assets. Illustration 5.12 shows an example of this, from the annual report of Vodafone plc (GBR).
Vodafone plc
(in millions)
Non-current assets
Other investments (Note 15)
£7,060
Note 15 Other investments
Other investments comprise the following, all of which are classified as listed and unlisted, with the
exception of other debt and bonds, which are classified as loans and receivables, and cash held as
restricted deposits.
Listed securities
Equity securities
£3,931
Unlisted securities
Equity securities
833
Public debt and bonds
20
Other debt and bonds
2,094
Cash held as restricted deposits
182
£7,060
ILLUSTRATION 5.12 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Restricted Cash
Equity
The equity (also referred to as shareholders’ equity) section is one of the most difficult sections to
prepare and understand. This is due to the complexity of ordinary and preference share agreements
and the various restrictions on equity imposed by company laws, liability agreements, and boards of
directors. Companies usually divide the section into six parts:

--- Page 394 ---
Equity Section
1. Share Capital. The par or stated value of shares issued. It includes ordinary shares
(sometimes referred to as common shares) and preference shares (sometimes referred to as
preferred shares).
2. Share Premium. The excess of amounts paid-in over the par or stated value.
3. Retained Earnings. The company’s undistributed earnings.
4. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income. The aggregate amount of the other
comprehensive income items.
5. Treasury Shares. Generally, the amount of ordinary shares repurchased.
6. Non-Controlling Interest. A portion of the equity of subsidiaries not owned by the
reporting company.
For ordinary shares, companies must disclose the par value and the authorized, issued, and
outstanding share amounts. The same holds true for preference shares. A company usually presents
the share premium (for both ordinary and preference shares) in one amount, although subtotals are
informative if the sources of additional capital are varied and material. The retained earnings amount
may be divided between the unappropriated (the amount that is usually available for dividend
distribution) and restricted (e.g., by bond indentures or other loan agreements) amounts. In addition,
companies show any shares reacquired (treasury shares) as a reduction of equity.
Accumulated other comprehensive income includes such items as unrealized gains and losses on non-
trading equity securities and unrealized gains and losses on certain derivative transactions. Non-
controlling interest is also shown as a separate item (where applicable) as a part of equity.
Illustration 5.13 presents an example of the equity section for Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL).
Ahold Delhaize
(in millions)
Share capital
€
13
Additional paid-in capital
13,999
Currency translation reserve
(60)
Cash flow hedging reserve
(2)
Reserve participations
407
Other reserves including retained earnings
460
Equity attributable to common shareholders € 14,817
ILLUSTRATION 5.13 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Equity
Many companies reporting under IFRS often use the term “reserve” as an all-inclusive catch-all for
items such as retained earnings, share premium, and accumulated other comprehensive income. An
example of such a presentation is shown in Illustration 5.14 for Lenovo Group Limited (CHN).

--- Page 395 ---
Lenovo Group Limited
(in millions)
Share capital
$3,185,923
Reserves
210,530
Equity attributed to owners of the Company
3,396,453
Perpetual securities
993,670
Other non-controlling interests
473,178
Put option written on non-controlling interest
(766,238)
Total equity
$4,097,063
ILLUSTRATION 5.14 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Reserves
The equity accounts in a corporation differ considerably from those in a partnership or proprietorship.
Partners show separately their permanent capital accounts and the balance in their temporary accounts
(drawing accounts). Proprietorships ordinarily use a single capital account that handles all of the
owner’s equity transactions.
Non-Current Liabilities
Non-current liabilities are obligations that a company does not reasonably expect to liquidate
within the longer of one year or the normal operating cycle. Instead, it expects to pay them at some
date beyond that time. That is, non-current liabilities are those that do not meet the definition of
current liabilities (see footnote 6). The most common examples are bonds payable, notes payable,
deferred income taxes, lease obligations, and pension obligations. Companies classify non-current
liabilities that mature within the current operating cycle or one year as current liabilities
if payment of the obligation requires the use of current assets.
Generally, non-current liabilities are of three types:
1. Obligations arising from specific financing situations, such as the issuance of bonds, long-term
lease obligations, and long-term notes payable.
2. Obligations arising from the ordinary operations of the company, such as pension obligations and
deferred income tax liabilities.
3. Obligations that depend on the occurrence or non-occurrence of one or more future events to
confirm the amount payable, or the payee, or the date payable, such as service or product
warranties, environmental liabilities, and restructurings, often referred to as provisions.
Companies generally provide a great deal of supplementary disclosure for non-current liabilities
because most long-term debt is subject to various covenants and restrictions for the protection of
lenders.
Companies frequently describe the terms of all non-current liability agreements (including maturity
date or dates, rates of interest, nature of obligation, and any security pledged to support the debt) in
notes to the financial statements. Illustration 5.15 provides an example of this, taken from an
excerpt from Silver Fern Farms Limited’s (NZL) financials.

--- Page 396 ---
Silver Fern Farms Limited
(in thousands)
Non-current liabilities
Long-term payables
NZD
603
Finance leases
55
Provisions
9,547
NZD 10,205
ILLUSTRATION 5.15 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Non-Current
Liabilities
Current Liabilities
Current liabilities are the obligations that a company generally expects to settle in its normal
operating cycle or one year, whichever is longer. This concept includes:
1. Payables resulting from the acquisition of goods and services: accounts payable, salaries and wages
payable, income taxes payable, and so on.
2. Collections received in advance for the delivery of goods or performance of services, such as
unearned rent revenue or unearned subscriptions revenue.
3. Other liabilities whose liquidation will take place within the operating cycle or one year, such as
the portion of long-term bonds to be paid in the current period, short-term obligations arising
from purchase of equipment, or estimated liabilities, such as a warranty liability. As indicated
earlier, estimated liabilities are often referred to as provisions.
At times, a liability that is payable within the next year is not included in the current liabilities section.
This occurs when the company refinances the debt on a long-term basis before the end of the reporting
period. [7] This approach is used because liquidation does not result from the use of current assets or
the creation of other current liabilities.
Companies do not report current liabilities in any consistent order. In general, though, companies most
commonly list notes payable, accounts payable, or short-term debt as the first item. Income tax
payables or other current liabilities are commonly listed last. For example, see Siemens AG’s (DEU)
current liabilities section in Illustration 5.16.

--- Page 397 ---
Siemens AG
(in millions)
Current liabilities
Short-term debt and current maturities of long-term debt
€ 5,057
Trade payables
10,716
Other current financial liabilities
1,485
Current liabilities
14,464
Current provisions
3,931
Current income tax liabilities
3,102
Other current liabilities
9,118
Liabilities associated with assets classified as held for disposal
1
Total current liabilities
€47,874
ILLUSTRATION 5.16 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Current Liabilities
Current liabilities include such items as trade and non-trade notes and accounts payable, advances
received from customers, and current maturities of long-term debt. If the amounts are material,
companies classify income taxes and other accrued items separately. A company should fully describe
in the notes any information about a secured liability—for example, shares held as collateral on notes
payable—to identify the assets providing the security.
The excess of total current assets over total current liabilities is referred to as working capital (or
sometimes net working capital). Working capital represents the net amount of a company’s
relatively liquid resources. That is, it is the liquidity buffer available to meet the financial demands of
the operating cycle.
Companies seldom disclose on the statement of financial position an amount for working capital. But
bankers and other creditors compute it as an indicator of the short-run liquidity of a company. To
determine the actual liquidity and availability of working capital to meet current obligations, however,
requires analysis of the composition of the current assets and their nearness to cash.

--- Page 398 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Warning Signals
Analysts use statement of financial position information in models designed to predict financial
distress. Researcher E. I. Altman pioneered a bankruptcy-prediction model that derives a “Z-
score” by combining statement of financial position and income measures in the following
equation.
Z =
× 1.2 +
× 1.4 +
× 3.3 +
×
Following extensive testing, Altman found that companies with Z-scores above 3.0 are unlikely to
fail. Those with Z-scores below 1.81 are very likely to fail.
Altman developed the original model for publicly held manufacturing companies. He and others
have modified the model to apply to companies in various industries, emerging companies, and
companies not traded in public markets.
At one time, the use of Z-scores was virtually unheard of among practicing accountants. Today,
auditors, management consultants, and courts of law use this measure to help evaluate the
overall financial position and trends of a firm. In addition, banks use Z-scores for loan evaluation.
While a low score does not guarantee bankruptcy, the model has been proven accurate in many
situations.
Source: Adapted from E. I. Altman and E. Hotchkiss, Corporate Financial Distress and Bankruptcy, Third Edition (Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2006).
Preparation of the Statement of Financial Position
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Prepare a classified statement of financial position.
As indicated earlier, IFRS does not specify the order or format in which a company presents items in
the statement of financial position (see the “What Do the Numbers Mean?” box entitled “What Comes
First?”). Thus, some companies present assets first, followed by equity, and then liabilities. Other
companies report current assets first in the assets section, and current liabilities first in the liabilities
section. Many companies report items such as receivables and property, plant, and equipment net and
then disclose the additional information related to the contra accounts in the notes.
Account Form
In general, companies use either the account form or the report form to present the statement of
financial position information. The account form lists assets, by sections, on the left side, and equity
and liabilities, by sections, on the right side. The main disadvantage is the need for a sufficiently wide
space in which to present the items side by side. Often, the account form requires two facing pages.
Report Form
The report form lists the sections one above the other, on the same page. See, for example,
Illustration 5.17, which lists assets, followed by equity and liabilities directly below, on the same
page.
Working Text
Total assets
Re tained earnings
Total assets
EBIT
Total assets
Sales
Total assets

--- Page 399 ---
Scientific Products, Inc.
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Non-current assets
Long-term investments
Investments in held-for-collection securities
$ 82,000
Land held for future development
5,500 $
87,500
Property, plant, and equipment
Land
125,000
Buildings
$975,800
Less: Accumulated depreciation
341,200
634,600
Total property, plant, and equipment
759,600
Intangible assets
Capitalized development costs
6,000
Goodwill
66,000
Other identifiable intangible assets
28,000
100,000
Total non-current assets
947,100
Current assets
Inventory
489,713
Prepaid expenses
16,252
Accounts receivable
165,824
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
1,850
163,974
Short-term investments
51,030
Cash and cash equivalents
52,485
Total current assets
773,454
Total assets
$1,720,554
Equity and Liabilities
Equity
Share capital—preference
$300,000
Share capital—ordinary
400,000
Share premium—preference
10,000
Share premium—ordinary
27,500
Retained earnings
170,482
Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss)
(8,650)
Less: Treasury shares
12,750
Equity attributable to owners
$886,582
Non-controlling interest
13,500
Total equity
$ 900,082
Non-current liabilities
Bond liabilities due January 31, 2031
425,000
Provisions related to pensions
75,000

--- Page 400 ---
Total non-current liabilities
500,000
Current liabilities
Notes payable
80,000
Accounts payable
197,532
Interest payable
20,500
Salaries and wages payable
5,560
Provisions related to warranties
12,500
Deposits received from customers
4,380
Total current liabilities
320,472
Total liabilities
820,472
Total equity and liabilities
$1,720,554
ILLUSTRATION 5.17 Classified Report-Form Statement of Financial Position
Infrequently, companies use other statement of financial position formats. For example, companies
sometimes deduct current liabilities from current assets to arrive at working capital. Or, they deduct all
liabilities from all assets.
Statement of Cash Flows
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the purpose, content, and preparation of the statement of cash flows.
Chapter 2 indicated that an important element of the objective of financial reporting is “assessing the
amounts, timing, and uncertainty of cash flows.” The three financial statements we have looked at so
far—the income statement (or statement of comprehensive income), the statement of changes in
equity, and the statement of financial position—all present some information about the cash flows of
an enterprise during a period. But they do so to a limited extent. For instance, the income statement
provides information about resources provided by operations but not exactly cash. The statement of
changes in equity shows the amount of cash used to pay dividends or purchase treasury shares.
Comparative statements of financial position might show what assets the company has acquired or
disposed of and what liabilities it has incurred or liquidated.
Useful as they are, none of these statements presents a detailed summary of all the cash inflows and
outflows, or the sources and uses of cash during the period. To fill this need, the IASB requires the
statement of cash flows (also called the cash flow statement). [8]
Purpose of the Statement of Cash Flows
The primary purpose of the statement of cash flows is to provide relevant information about the cash
receipts and cash payments of an enterprise during a period. To achieve this purpose, the statement of
cash flows reports the following: (1) the cash effects of operations during a period, (2) investing
transactions, (3) financing transactions, and (4) the net increase or decrease in cash during the period.8
Reporting the sources, uses, and net increase or decrease in cash helps investors, creditors, and others
know what is happening to a company’s most liquid resource (see Underlying Concepts). Because
most individuals maintain a checkbook and prepare a tax return on a cash basis, they can comprehend
the information reported in the statement of cash flows.

--- Page 401 ---
Underlying Concepts
The statement of cash flows meets the objective of financial reporting—to help assess the
amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
The statement of cash flows provides answers to the following simple but important questions:
1. Where did the cash come from during the period?
2. What was the cash used for during the period?
3. What was the change in the cash balance during the period?
Content of the Statement of Cash Flows
Companies classify cash receipts and cash payments during a period into three different activities in
the statement of cash flows—operating, investing, and financing activities, defined as follows.
1. Operating activities involve the cash effects of transactions that enter into the determination of
net income.
2. Investing activities include making and collecting loans and acquiring and disposing of
investments (both debt and equity) and property, plant, and equipment.
3. Financing activities involve liability and equity items. They include (a) obtaining resources
from owners and providing them with a return on their investment, and (b) borrowing money
from creditors and repaying the amounts borrowed.
Illustration 5.18 shows the basic format of the statement of cash flows.
Statement of Cash Flows
Cash flows from operating activities $XXX
Cash flows from investing activities
XXX
Cash flows from financing activities
XXX
Net increase (decrease) in cash
XXX
Cash at beginning of year
XXX
Cash at end of year
$XXX
ILLUSTRATION 5.18 Basic Format of Cash Flow Statement
Illustration 5.19 graphs the inflows and outflows of cash classified by activity.

--- Page 402 ---
ILLUSTRATION 5.19 Cash Inflows and Outflows
The statement’s value is that it helps users evaluate liquidity, solvency, and financial
flexibility. As stated earlier, liquidity refers to the “nearness to cash” of assets and liabilities.
Solvency is the firm’s ability to pay its debts as they mature. Financial flexibility is a company’s
ability to respond and adapt to financial adversity and unexpected needs and opportunities.
We have devoted Chapter 23 entirely to the detailed preparation and content of the statement of cash
flows. The intervening chapters will cover several elements and complex topics that affect the content
of a typical statement of cash flows. The presentation in this chapter is introductory—a reminder of the
existence of the statement of cash flows and its usefulness.

--- Page 403 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Watch That Cash Flow
Investors usually focus on net income measured on an accrual basis. However, information on
cash flows can be important for assessing a company’s liquidity, financial flexibility, and overall
financial performance. The graph shows W. T. Grant’s (USA) financial performance over seven
years.
Although W. T. Grant showed consistent profits and even some periods of earnings growth, its
cash flow began to “go south” starting in about year three. The company filed for bankruptcy
shortly after year seven. Financial statement readers who studied the company’s cash flows would
have found early warnings of its problems. The Grant experience is a classic case, illustrating the
importance of cash flows as an early-warning signal of financial problems.
The recent picture at IBM (USA) is similar and raises some red flags as to the company’s financial
flexibility. As shown in the chart, IBM’s earnings per share (EPS) growth has held fairly steady,
but free cash flow is on the decline.

--- Page 404 ---
A look under the hood indicates that while debt levels are increasing, IBM has been using free
cash flow for increased dividends and share buybacks. Recall that buybacks increase EPS by
reducing shares outstanding. Free cash flow going toward dividends and share repurchases
indicates IBM’s “low quality of earnings.” As one market commentator noted, “negative free cash
flow leads to increased borrowing.” These are metrics that investors ignore at their peril.
Source: A. Shields, “Why IBM Has Generated Higher Earnings Despite Falling Revenue,” Market Realist,
marketrealist.com/2014/07/why-ibm-has-generated-higher-earnings-despite-falling-revenues/ (July 11, 2014).
Preparation of the Statement of Cash Flows
Sources of Information
Companies obtain the information to prepare the statement of cash flows from several sources: (1)
comparative statements of financial position, (2) the current income statement, and (3) selected
transaction data.
The following simple example demonstrates how companies use these sources in preparing a
statement of cash flows.
On January 1, 2022, in its first year of operations, Telemarketing Inc. issued 50,000 ordinary shares of
$1 par value for $50,000 cash. The company rented its office space, furniture, and telecommunications
equipment and performed marketing services throughout the first year. In June 2022, the company
purchased land for $15,000. Illustration 5.20 shows the company’s comparative statements of
financial position at the beginning and end of 2022.

--- Page 405 ---
Telemarketing Inc.
Statements of Financial Position
Assets
Dec. 31, 2022 Jan. 1, 2022 Increase/Decrease
Land
$15,000
$–0–
$15,000 Increase
Accounts receivable
41,000
–0–
41,000 Increase
Cash
31,000
–0–
31,000 Increase
Total
$87,000
$–0–
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital
$50,000
$–0–
50,000 Increase
Retained earnings
25,000
–0–
25,000 Increase
Accounts payable
12,000
–0–
12,000 Increase
Total
$87,000
$–0–
ILLUSTRATION 5.20 Comparative Statements of Financial Position
Illustration 5.21 presents the income statement and additional information.
Telemarketing Inc.
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Revenues
$172,000
Operating expenses
120,000
Income before income tax
52,000
Income tax
13,000
Net income
$ 39,000
Additional information:
Dividends of $14,000 were paid during the year.
ILLUSTRATION 5.21 Income Statement Data
Preparing the Statement of Cash Flows
Preparing the statement of cash flows from these sources involves four steps:
1. Determine the net cash provided by (or used by) operating activities.
2. Determine the net cash provided by (or used by) investing and financing activities.
3. Determine the change (increase or decrease) in cash during the period.
4. Reconcile the change in cash with the beginning and the ending cash balances.
Net cash provided by operating activities is the excess of cash receipts over cash payments from
operating activities. Companies determine this amount by converting net income on an accrual basis to
a cash basis. To do so, they add to or deduct from net income those items in the income statement that
do not affect cash. This procedure requires that a company analyze not only the current year’s income
statement but also the comparative statements of financial position and selected transaction data.
Analysis of Telemarketing’s comparative statements of financial position reveals two items that will
affect the computation of net cash provided by operating activities:
1. The increase in accounts receivable reflects a non-cash increase of $41,000 in revenues.
2. The increase in accounts payable reflects a non-cash increase of $12,000 in expenses.

--- Page 406 ---
Therefore, to arrive at net cash provided by operating activities, Telemarketing Inc. deducts from net
income the increase in accounts receivable ($41,000), and it adds back to net income the increase in
accounts payable ($12,000). As a result of these adjustments, the company determines net cash
provided by operating activities to be $10,000, computed as shown in Illustration 5.22.
Net income
$39,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating activities:
Increase in accounts receivable
$(41,000)
Increase in accounts payable
12,000 (29,000)
Net cash provided by operating activities
$10,000
ILLUSTRATION 5.22 Computation of Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Next, the company determines its investing and financing activities. Telemarketing Inc.’s only
investing activity was the land purchase. It had two financing activities. (1) Share capital—
ordinary increased $50,000 from the issuance of 50,000 ordinary shares for cash. (2) The company
paid $14,000 cash in dividends. Knowing the amounts provided or used by operating, investing, and
financing activities, the company determines the net increase in cash. Illustration 5.23 presents
Telemarketing Inc.’s statement of cash flows for 2022.
Telemarketing Inc.
Statement of Cash Flows
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income
$39,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating
activities:
Increase in accounts receivable
$(41,000)
Increase in accounts payable
12,000 (29,000)
Net cash provided by operating activities
10,000
Cash flows from investing activities
Purchase of land
(15,000)
Net cash used by investing activities
(15,000)
Cash flows from financing activities
Issuance of ordinary shares
50,000
Payment of cash dividends
(14,000)
Net cash provided by financing activities
36,000
Net increase in cash
31,000
Cash at beginning of year
–0–
Cash at end of year
$31,000
ILLUSTRATION 5.23 Statement of Cash Flows
The increase in cash of $31,000 reported in the statement of cash flows is equal to $31,000 in cash
calculated from the comparative statements of financial position.9
Significant Non-Cash Activities
Not all of a company’s significant activities involve cash. Examples of significant non-cash activities
are:

--- Page 407 ---
1. Issuance of ordinary shares to purchase assets.
2. Conversion of bonds into ordinary shares.
3. Issuance of debt to purchase assets.
4. Exchanges of long-lived assets.
Significant financing and investing activities that do not affect cash are not reported in the body of the
statement of cash flows. Rather, these activities are reported in a separate note to the financial
statements. Such reporting of these non-cash activities satisfies the full disclosure principle.
Illustration 5.24 shows an example of a comprehensive statement of cash flows. Note that the
company purchased equipment through the issuance of €50,000 of bonds, which is a significant non-
cash transaction. For homework purposes, you should present significant non-cash activities in a
separate note entitled “Cash Flow Note.”
Nestor SA
Statement of Cash Flows
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income
€320,750
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating
activities:
Depreciation expense
€88,400
Amortization of intangibles
16,300
Gain on sale of plant assets
(8,700)
Increase in accounts receivable (net)
(11,000)
Decrease in inventory
15,500
Decrease in accounts payable
(9,500)
91,000
Net cash provided by operating activities
411,750
Cash flows from investing activities
Sale of plant assets
90,500
Purchase of equipment
(182,500)
Purchase of land
(70,000)
Net cash used by investing activities
(162,000)
Cash flows from financing activities
Payment of cash dividend
(19,800)
Issuance of ordinary shares
100,000
Redemption of bonds
(50,000)
Net cash provided by financing activities
30,200
Net increase in cash
279,950
Cash at beginning of year
135,000
Cash at end of year
€414,9501
1Cash Flow Note
A non-cash investing and financing activity was the purchase of equipment through issuance of
€50,000 of bonds.
ILLUSTRATION 5.24 Comprehensive Statement of Cash Flows

--- Page 408 ---
Usefulness of the Statement of Cash Flows
“Happiness is a positive cash flow” is certainly true. Although net income provides a long-term
measure of a company’s success or failure, cash is its lifeblood. Without cash, a company will not
survive. For small and newly developing companies, cash flow is the single most important element for
survival. Even medium and large companies must control cash flow.
Creditors examine the cash flow statement carefully because they are concerned about being paid. They
begin their examination by finding net cash provided by operating activities. A high amount indicates
that a company is able to generate sufficient cash from operations to pay its bills without further
borrowing. Conversely, a low or negative amount of net cash provided by operating activities indicates
that a company may have to borrow or issue equity securities to acquire sufficient cash to pay its bills.
Consequently, creditors look for answers to the following questions in the company’s cash flow
statements.
1. How successful is the company in generating net cash provided by operating activities?
2. What are the trends in net cash flow provided by operating activities over time?
3. What are the major reasons for the positive or negative net cash provided by operating activities?
You should recognize that companies can fail even though they report net income. The difference
between net income and net cash provided by operating activities can be substantial. Companies
sometimes report high net income numbers but negative net cash provided by operating activities. This
type of situation can eventually lead to bankruptcy.
In addition, substantial increases in receivables and/or inventory can explain the difference between
positive net income and negative net cash provided by operating activities. For example, in its first year
of operations Hu Ltd. reported a net income of HK$80,000. Its net cash provided by operating
activities, however, was a negative HK$95,000, as shown in Illustration 5.25.
Hu.Ltd
Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income
HK$ 80,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by
operating activities:
Increase in receivables
HK$ (75,000)
Increase in inventory
(100,000)
(175,000)
Net cash provided by operating activities
HK$ (95,000)
ILLUSTRATION 5.25 Negative Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Hu could easily experience a “cash crunch” because it has its cash tied up in receivables and inventory.
If Hu encounters problems in collecting receivables, or if inventory moves slowly or becomes obsolete,
its creditors may have difficulty collecting on their loans.
Financial Liquidity
Readers of financial statements often assess liquidity by using the current cash debt coverage. It
indicates whether the company can pay off its current liabilities from its operations in a given year.
Illustration 5.26 shows the formula for this ratio.
= Current Cash Debt Coverage
ILLUSTRATION 5.26 Formula for Current Cash Debt Coverage
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Average Current Liabilities

--- Page 409 ---
The higher the current cash debt coverage, the less likely a company will have liquidity problems. For
example, a ratio near 1:1 is good. It indicates that the company can meet all of its current obligations
from internally generated cash flow.
Financial Flexibility
The cash debt coverage provides information on financial flexibility. It indicates a company’s ability
to repay its liabilities from net cash provided by operating activities, without having to liquidate the
assets employed in its operations. Illustration 5.27 shows the formula for this ratio. Notice its
similarity to the current cash debt coverage. However, because it uses average total liabilities in place
of average current liabilities, it takes a somewhat longer-range view.
= Cash Debt Coverage
ILLUSTRATION 5.27 Formula for Cash Debt Coverage
The higher this ratio, the less likely the company will experience difficulty in meeting its obligations as
they come due. It signals whether the company can pay its debts and survive if external sources of
funds become limited or too expensive.
Free Cash Flow
A more sophisticated way to examine a company’s financial flexibility is to develop a free cash flow
analysis. Free cash flow is the amount of discretionary cash flow a company has. It can use this cash
flow to purchase additional investments, retire its debt, purchase treasury shares, or simply add to its
liquidity. Financial statement users calculate free cash flow as shown in Illustration 5.28.
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
by Operating
Activities
−
Capital
Expenditures −Cash Dividends =
Free
Cash Flow
ILLUSTRATION 5.28 Formula for Free Cash Flow
In a free cash flow analysis, we first deduct capital spending to indicate it is the least discretionary
expenditure a company generally makes. (Without continued efforts to maintain and expand facilities,
it is unlikely that a company can continue to maintain its competitive position.) We then deduct
dividends. Although a company can cut its dividend, it usually will do so only in a financial
emergency. The amount resulting after these deductions is the company’s free cash flow. Obviously,
the greater the amount of free cash flow, the greater the company’s amount of financial flexibility.
Questions that a free cash flow analysis answers are:
1. Is the company able to pay its dividends without resorting to external financing?
2. If business operations decline, will the company be able to maintain its needed capital
investment?
3. What is the amount of discretionary cash flow that can be used for additional investment,
retirement of debt, purchase of treasury shares, or addition to liquidity?
Illustration 5.29 is a free cash flow analysis using the cash flow statement for Nestor SA (shown in
Illustration 5.24).
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Average Total Liabilities

--- Page 410 ---
Nestor SA
Free Cash Flow Analysis
Net cash provided by operating activities
€411,750
Capital expenditures
(252,500)
Dividends
(19,800)
Free cash flow
€139,450
ILLUSTRATION 5.29 Free Cash Flow Computation
This computation shows that Nestor has a positive, and substantial, net cash provided by operating
activities of €411,750. Nestor’s statement of cash flows reports that the company purchased equipment
of €182,500 and land of €70,000 for total capital spending of €252,500. Nestor has more than
sufficient cash flow to meet its dividend payment and therefore has satisfactory financial flexibility.
As you can see from looking back at Illustration 5.24, Nestor used its free cash flow to redeem bonds
and add to its liquidity. If it finds additional investments that are profitable, it can increase its spending
without putting its dividend or basic capital spending in jeopardy. Companies that have strong financial
flexibility can take advantage of profitable investments even in tough times. In addition, strong
financial flexibility frees companies from worry about survival in poor economic times. In fact, those
with strong financial flexibility often fare better in a poor economy because they can take advantage of
opportunities that other companies cannot.
Additional Information
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Describe additional types of information provided.
IFRS requires that a complete set of financial statements be presented annually. Along with the current
year’s financial statements, companies must also provide comparative information from the
previous period. In other words, a complete set of financial statements and related notes for two years
must be reported.
A complete set of financial statements comprise the following.
1. A statement of financial position at the end of the period.
2. A statement of comprehensive income for the period to be presented either as:
a. One single statement of comprehensive income.
b. A separate income statement and statement of comprehensive income. In this situation, the
income statement is presented first.
3. A statement of changes in equity.
4. A statement of cash flows.
5. Notes, comprising a summary of significant accounting policies and other explanatory
information. [9]
Chapters 4 and 5 discussed the first four items. However, the primary financial statements cannot
provide the complete picture related to the financial position and financial performance of the
company. Descriptive information is also required by IFRS in the notes to the financial statements to
amplify or explain the items presented in the main body of the statements.
Notes to the Financial Statements

--- Page 411 ---
As indicated earlier, notes are an integral part of reporting financial statement information. Notes can
explain in qualitative terms information related to specific financial statement items. In addition, they
can provide supplemental data of a quantitative nature to expand the information in financial
statements. Notes also can explain restrictions imposed by financial arrangements or basic contractual
agreements. Although notes may be technical and difficult to understand in some cases, they provide
meaningful information for the user of the financial statements.
Accounting Policies
Accounting policies are the specific principles, bases, conventions, rules, and practices applied by a
company in preparing and presenting financial information. The IASB recommends disclosure of all
significant accounting principles and methods that involve selection from among alternatives or those
that are peculiar to a given industry. For instance, companies can compute inventories under several
cost flow assumptions (e.g., average-cost and FIFO), depreciate plant and equipment under several
accepted methods (e.g., double-declining balance and straight-line), and carry investments at different
valuations (e.g., cost, equity, and fair value). Sophisticated users of financial statements know of these
possibilities and examine the statements closely to determine the methods used.
Companies therefore present a “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” generally as the first note
to the financial statements. This disclosure is important because, under IFRS, alternative treatments of
a transaction are sometimes permitted. If these policies are not understood, users of the financial
statements are not able to use the financial statements to make comparisons between companies.
Illustrations 5.30 to 5.33 present some examples of various accounting policy disclosures adapted
from companies’ annual reports.
LG
(KOR)
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Cost is determined using the
weighted-average method, except for inventories in-transit, which is determined using the specific
identification method. The cost of finished goods and work-in-process comprises raw materials, direct
labour, other direct costs and related production overheads (based on normal operating capacity). The
Group periodically reviews a possibility of significant changes in net realizable value of inventories
not in use, decrease in market value and obsolescence, and recognizes as Allowances for Valuation of
Inventories. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less
applicable selling expenses.
ILLUSTRATION 5.30 Accounting Policies—Inventory
Stora Enso
(FIN)
Intangible assets are stated at historical cost and are amortized on a straight-line basis over their
expected useful lives, which usually vary from 3 to 10 years and up to 20 years for patents.
ILLUSTRATION 5.31 Accounting Policies—Intangible Asset

--- Page 412 ---
Sports Direct
(GBR)
Property, plant and equipment
Property, plant and equipment are stated at historical cost less depreciation less any recognised
impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition or
construction of these items. Subsequent costs are included in the asset’s carrying amount only when it
is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group and the costs
can be measured reliably.
All other costs, including repairs and maintenance costs, are charged to the income statement in the
period in which they are incurred.
Depreciation is provided on all property, plant and equipment other than freehold land and is
calculated on a reducing balance basis or straight-line basis, whichever is deemed by the directors to
be more appropriate, to allocate cost less assessed residual value, other than assets in the course of
construction, over the estimated useful lives, as follows:
Freehold buildings—between 4% and 10% per annum—straight line
Leasehold improvements—20% or over the term of the lease, whichever is shortest—straight line
Plant and equipment—between 20% and 33% per annum—straight line
The assets’ useful lives and residual values are reviewed and, if appropriate, adjusted at each balance
sheet date. The gain or loss arising on disposal or scrapping of an asset is determined as the difference
between the sales proceeds, net of selling costs, and the carrying amount of the asset and is recognised
in the income statement.
Property, plant and equipment where the carrying amount is recovered principally through a sales
transaction and where a sale is considered to be highly probable is stated at the lower of carrying value
and fair value less costs to sell.
ILLUSTRATION 5.32 Accounting Policies—Property, Plant, and Equipment
Ahold Delhaize
(NLD/BEL)
Non-derivative Financial Liabilities
IFRS 9 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement contains two categories for non-
derivative financial liabilities (hereafter “financial liabilities”): financial liabilities at fair value through
profit or loss and financial liabilities measured at amortized cost. Ahold Delhaize holds only financial
liabilities measured at amortized cost, which are included in “Debts,” “Borrowings,” “Accounts
payable” and “Other liabilities.”
ILLUSTRATION 5.33 Accounting Policies—Financial Liabilities
Additional Notes to the Financial Statements

--- Page 413 ---
In addition to a note related to explanation of the companies’ accounting policies, companies use
specific notes to discuss items in the financial statements. Judgment must be exercised to identify the
important aspects of financial information that need amplification in the notes. In many cases, IFRS
requires specific disclosures. For example, using the statement of financial position as an example,
note disclosures include:
1. Items of property, plant, and equipment are disaggregated into classes such as land, buildings, etc.,
in the notes, with related accumulated depreciation reported where applicable.
2. Receivables are disaggregated into amounts receivable from trade customers, receivables from
related parties, prepayments, and other amounts.
3. Inventories are disaggregated into classifications such as merchandise, production supplies, work
in process, and finished goods.
4. Provisions are disaggregated into provisions for employee benefits and other items.
In addition, there are often schedules and computations required by a specific standard. For example,
for receivables, IFRS requires a maturity analysis for receivables. Illustration 5.34 shows a maturity
analysis for Lenovo Group (CHN).
Lenovo Group
(in thousands)
Current
Trade receivables
$6,761,826
Less: allowance
(100,342)
$6,661,484
22. Trade and other receivables
Customers are generally granted credit term ranging from 0 to 120 days. Ageing analysis of trade
receivables of the Group at the balance sheet date, based on invoice date, is as follows:
2019
0–30 days
4,560,771
31–60 days
1,332,471
61–90 days
430,207
Over 90 days
438,377
6,761,826
Less: loss allowance
(100,342)
Trade receivables—net
6,661,484
ILLUSTRATION 5.34 Maturity Analysis for Receivables
Another maturity analysis is required for financial liabilities. Illustration 5.35 shows such an
adapted analysis for Christian Dior (FRA).

--- Page 414 ---
Christian Dior
(in euro millions)
Note 18.2
Analysis of gross borrowings by payment date before derivatives
Gross borrowings
Fixed rate
Floating rate
Total
Maturity
December 31, 2019
4,940
610
5,550
December 31, 2020
1,900
13
1,913
December 31, 2021
1,735
5
1,740
December 31, 2022
1,262
3
1,265
December 31, 2023
22
4
26
December 31, 2024
1,217
1
1,218
Thereafter
184
7
191
Total
11,260
643
11,903
ILLUSTRATION 5.35 Maturity Analysis for Financial Liabilities
Also, companies are required to reconcile the balances for many of the assets and liabilities reported in
the financial statements from the beginning to the end of the year (sometimes referred to as a roll-
forward of financial information). For example, a reconciliation of the balances in property, plant, and
equipment; intangible assets; and provisions are generally provided. An example for property, plant,
and equipment for Nestlé (CHE) is shown in Illustration 5.36.
Nestlé
(in millions)
Land and
buildings
Machinery and
equipment
Tools, furniture and
other equipment
Vehicles Total
Gross value
At 1 January
17,841
31,103
8,013
615 57,572
Currency retranslations
(617)
(980)
(160)
(5) (1,762)
Capital expenditure
1,025
2,013
782
40
3,860
Disposals
(135)
(592)
(466)
(88) (1,281)
Reclassification
(to)/from held for sale
(387)
(260)
(85)
(2)
(734)
Modification of the
scope of consolidation
20
9
(15)
—
14
At 31 December
17,747
31,293
8,069
560 57,669
ILLUSTRATION 5.36 Reconciliation Schedule for Property, Plant, and Equipment

--- Page 415 ---
Note disclosure is extensive using IFRS. Many companies’ annual reports are substantial in nature, and
it is not unusual for a large company to have over 20 pages of notes to the financial statements.
Techniques of Disclosure
Companies should disclose as completely as possible the effect of various uncertainties on financial
condition, the methods of valuing assets and liabilities, and the company’s contracts and agreements.
To disclose this pertinent information, companies may use parenthetical explanations and cross-
reference and contra items.
Parenthetical Explanations
Companies often provide additional information by parenthetical explanations following the item. For
example, Illustration 5.37 shows a parenthetical explanation of the number of shares issued by
Hitachi (JPN) on the statement of financial position under “Equity.”
Hitachi
Equity
Common stock (4,637,785,317 outstanding) ¥427,776
ILLUSTRATION 5.37 Parenthetical Disclosure of Shares Issued
This additional pertinent statement of financial position information adds clarity and completeness. It
has an advantage over a note because it brings the additional information into the body of the
statement where readers will less likely overlook it. Companies, however, should avoid lengthy
parenthetical explanations, which might be distracting.
Cross-Reference and Contra Items
Companies “cross-reference” a direct relationship between an asset and a liability on the statement of
financial position. For example, as shown in Illustration 5.38, on December 31, 2022, a company
might show the following entries—one listed among the current assets, and the other listed among the
current liabilities.
Current Assets (in part)
Cash on deposit with sinking fund
trustee for redemption of bonds
payable—see Current liabilities
$800,000
Current Liabilities (in part)
Bonds payable to be redeemed in
2022—see Current assets
$2,300,000
ILLUSTRATION 5.38 Cross-Referencing and Contra Items
This cross-reference points out that the company will redeem $2,300,000 of bonds payable currently,
for which it has only set aside $800,000. Therefore, it needs additional cash from unrestricted cash,
from sales of investments, from profits, or from some other source. Alternatively, the company can
show the same information parenthetically.
Another common procedure is to establish contra or adjunct accounts. A contra account on a
statement of financial position reduces either an asset, liability, or equity account. Examples include
Accumulated Depreciation and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts. Contra accounts provide some

--- Page 416 ---
flexibility in presenting the financial information. With the use of the Accumulated Depreciation
account, for example, a reader of the statement can see the original cost of the asset as well as the
depreciation to date.
An adjunct account, on the other hand, increases either an asset, liability, or equity account. An
example is Fair Value Adjustment, which, when added to the Non-Trading Equity Investment account,
describes the total investment asset of the company.
Other Guidelines
In addition to the specifics related to individual financial statements and notes to these statements,
IAS No. 1 also addresses important issues related to presentation. [10]
Offsetting
IAS No. 1 indicates that it is important that assets and liabilities, and income and expense, be reported
separately. Otherwise, it may be difficult for users to understand the transactions or events that
occurred at the company. Therefore, it is improper for a company like Sinopec (CHN) to offset
accounts payable against cash. Similarly, it is improper for Sinopec to offset debt used to purchase
buildings against the buildings on the statement of financial position. However, it is proper for Sinopec
to measure assets net of valuation allowances, such as allowance for doubtful accounts or inventory
net of impairment. In these cases, the company is simply reporting the appropriate value on the
financial statement and, therefore, it is not considered offsetting. In general, unless a specific IFRS
permits offsetting, it is not permitted.
Consistency
The Conceptual Framework discussed in Chapter 2 notes that one of the enhancing qualitative
characteristics is comparability. As part of comparability, the Conceptual Framework indicates that
companies should follow consistent principles and methods from one period to the next. [11] As a
result, accounting policies must be consistently applied for similar transactions and events unless an
IFRS requires a different policy. Thus, Woolworths (AUS), which uses the straight-line method for
depreciating property, plant, and equipment, reports on the straight-line method for all periods
presented.
Fair Presentation
Companies must present fairly the financial position, financial performance, and cash flows of the
company. Fair presentation means the faithful representation of transactions and events using the
definitions and recognition criteria in the Conceptual Framework. It is presumed that the use of IFRS
with appropriate disclosure results in financial statements that are fairly presented. In other words,
inappropriate use of accounting policies cannot be overcome by explanatory notes to the financial
statements.
In some rare cases, as indicated in Chapter 2, companies can use a “true and fair” override. This
situation develops, for example, when the IFRS for a given company appears to conflict with the
objective of financial reporting. This situation might occur when a regulatory body indicates that a
specific IFRS may be misleading. As indicated earlier, a true and fair override is highly unlikely in
today’s reporting environment.10

--- Page 417 ---
Evolving Issue
Statement of Financial Position Reporting: Gross or Net?
In addition to the issue of financial statement presentation discussed in the opening story, a
second area of controversy for statement of financial position reporting is the issue of offsetting
(or netting) of assets and liabilities. It is generally accepted that offsetting of recognized assets
and recognized liabilities detracts from the ability of users both to understand the transactions
and conditions that have occurred and to assess the company’s future cash flows. In other words,
providing information on assets, liabilities, and equity helps users to compute rates of return and
evaluate capital structure. However, netting assets and liabilities limits a user’s ability to assess
the future economic benefits and obligations.
That is, offsetting hides the existence of assets and liabilities, making it difficult to evaluate
liquidity, solvency, and financial flexibility. As a result, U.S. GAAP does not permit the reporting
of summary accounts alone (e.g., total assets, net assets, and total liabilities). The IASB and FASB
have worked to develop common criteria for offsetting on the statement of financial position.
Current offsetting rules under IFRS are more restrictive than under U.S. GAAP. The rules
proposed would allow offsetting only in rare circumstances (e.g., when right of offset is legally
enforceable).
Implementation of these rules in the United States would result in a dramatic “grossing up” of
statements of financial position (particularly for financial institutions). For example, one study
estimated that the new rules would gross up U.S. banks’ statements of financial position by $900
billion (or an average of 68%, ranging from a 31.4% increase for Citigroup to 104.7% for
Morgan Stanley).* Not surprisingly, the FASB received significant push-back from some of its
constituents (particularly financial institutions) to the proposed rules. The U.S. banks feared the
new rules could place them in a less favorable light when compared to their international
counterparts, such as Deutsche Bank (DEU) and BNP Paribas (FRA). As a result, there is not
a converged standard in this area.
However, the Boards have issued converged disclosure requirements. The disclosure rules require
companies to disclose both gross information and net information about instruments and
transactions that are eligible for offset in the statement of financial position. While the Boards
have not been able to develop a converged set of criteria for offsetting, the information provided
under the new converged disclosure rules should enable users of a company’s financial
statements to evaluate the effects of netting arrangements on its financial position. In doing so,
the rules support the full disclosure principle. As discussed earlier, the IASB is not actively
pursuing a project on the statement of financial position. Its project on improvements to the
structure and content of the primary financial statements is focused on the statement(s) of
financial performance (see the IFRS website for more information).
Source: Adapted from Y. N’Diaye, “S&P: Accounting Rule Could Boost Bank Balance Sheets by Average 68%,”
mninews.deutsche-boerse.com (September 22, 2011).
APPENDIX 5A
Ratio Analysis—A Reference
Using Ratios to Analyze Performance
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Identify the major types of financial ratios and what they measure.

--- Page 418 ---
Analysts and other interested parties can gather qualitative information from financial statements by
examining relationships between items on the statements and identifying trends in these relationships.
A useful starting point in developing this information is ratio analysis.
A ratio expresses the mathematical relationship between one quantity and another. Ratio analysis
expresses the relationship among pieces of selected financial statement data, in a percentage, a rate,
or a simple proportion.
To illustrate, Acer Group (TWN) recently had current assets of NT$186,391 million and current
liabilities of NT$149,315 million. We find the ratio between these two amounts by dividing current
assets by current liabilities. The alternative means of expression are:
Percentage: Current assets are 125% of current liabilities.
Rate:
Current assets are 1.25 times as great as current liabilities.
Proportion: The relationship of current assets to current liabilities is 1.25:1.
To analyze financial statements, we classify ratios into four types, as follows.
Major Types of Ratios
Liquidity Ratios. Measures of the company’s short-term ability to pay its maturing obligations.
Activity Ratios. Measures of how effectively the company uses its assets.
Profitability Ratios. Measures of the degree of success or failure of a given company or division
for a given period of time.
Coverage Ratios. Measures of the degree of protection for long-term creditors and investors.
In Chapter 5, we discussed three measures related to the statement of cash flows (current cash debt
coverage, cash debt coverage, and free cash flow). Throughout the remainder of the text, we provide
ratios to help you understand and interpret the information presented in financial statements.
Illustration 5A.1 presents the ratios that we will use throughout the text. You should find this chart
helpful as you examine these ratios in more detail in the following chapters. An appendix to Chapter 24
further discusses financial statement analysis.

--- Page 419 ---
Ratio
Formula
Purpose or
Use
I. Liquidity
 
 
1. Current
ratio
Measures short-
term debt-paying
ability
2. Quick or
acid-test
ratio
Measures
immediate short-
term liquidity
3. Current
cash debt
coverage
Measures a
company’s ability
to pay off its
current liabilities
in a given year
from its operations
II. Activity
 
 
4. Accounts
receivable
turnover
Measures liquidity
of receivables
5. Inventory
turnover
Measures liquidity
of inventory
6. Asset
turnover
Measures how
efficiently assets
are used to
generate sales
III.
Profitability
 
 
7. Profit
margin
on sales
Measures net
income generated
by each dollar of
sales
8. Return
on assets
Measures overall
profitability of
assets
9. Return
Measures
profitability of
Current assets
Current liabilities
Cash + Short-term investments + Accounts receivable (net)
Current liabilities
Net cash provided by operating activities
Average current liabilities
Net sales
Average net accounts receivable
Cost of goods sold
Average inventory
Net sales
Average total assets
Net income
Net sales
Net income
Average total assets

--- Page 420 ---
on share
capital—
ordinary
owners’
investment
10. Earnings
per share
Measures net
income earned on
each ordinary
share
11. Price-
earnings
ratio
Measures the ratio
of the market price
per share to
earnings per share
12. Payout
ratio
Measures
percentage of
earnings
distributed in the
form of cash
dividends
IV. Coverage  
 
13. Debt to
assets
ratio
Measures the
percentage of total
assets provided by
creditors
14. Times
interest
earned
Measures ability to
meet interest
payments as they
come due
15. Cash debt
coverage
Measures a
company’s ability
to repay its total
liabilities in a given
year from its
operations
16. Book
value per
share
Measures the
amount each
ordinary share
would receive if the
company were
liquidated at the
amounts reported
on the statement of
financial position
Net income - Preference dividends
Average shareholders’ equity—ordinary
Net income - Preference dividends
Weighted-average ordinary shares outstanding
Market price of share
Earnings per share
Cash dividends
Net income
Total liabilities
Total assets
Net income + Interest expense + Income tax expense
Interest expense
Net cash provided by operating activities
Average total liabilities
Shareholders’ equity—ordinary
Outstanding shares

--- Page 421 ---
p
17. Free cash
flow
Net cash provided by operating activities − Capital expenditures −
Cash dividends
Measures the
amount of
discretionary cash
flow
ILLUSTRATION 5A.1 A Summary of Financial Ratios
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
account form
accounting policies
accumulated other comprehensive income
*activity ratios
adjunct account
balance sheet
cash debt coverage
comparative information
contra account
*coverage ratios
current assets
current cash debt coverage
current liabilities
equity (shareholders)
financial flexibility
financial instrument (n)
financing activities
free cash flow
held-for-collection securities
intangible assets
investing activities
liquidity
*liquidity ratios
long-term investments
non-controlling interest
non-current assets
non-current liabilities
non-trading equity securities
operating activities

--- Page 422 ---
*profitability ratios
property, plant, and equipment
*ratio analysis
report form
retained earnings
share capital
share premium
solvency
statement of cash flows
statement of financial position
trading securities
treasury shares
working capital
Learning Objectives Review
1 Explain the uses, limitations, and content of the statement of financial position.
The statement of financial position provides information about the nature and amounts of investments
in a company’s resources, obligations to creditors, and equity. The statement of financial position
contributes to financial reporting by providing a basis for (1) computing rates of return, (2) evaluating
the capital structure of the enterprise, and (3) assessing the liquidity, solvency, and financial flexibility
of the enterprise.
Three limitations of a statement of financial position are as follows. (1) The statement of
financial position generally does not reflect fair value because accountants use a historical cost basis in
valuing and reporting most assets and liabilities. (2) Companies must use judgments and estimates to
determine certain amounts, such as the collectibility of receivables and the useful life of long-term
tangible and intangible assets. (3) The statement of financial position omits many items that are of
financial value to the business but cannot be recorded objectively, such as human resources, customer
base, and reputation.
The general elements of the statement of financial position are assets, equity, and liabilities.
The major classifications of assets are non-current assets; long-term investments; property, plant, and
equipment; intangible assets; other assets; and current assets. The major classifications of liabilities
are non-current and current liabilities. The statement of financial position of a company generally
classifies equity as share capital, share premium, and retained earnings.
2 Prepare a classified statement of financial position.
The report form lists equity and liabilities directly below assets on the same page. The account form
lists assets, by sections, on the left side, and equity and liabilities, by sections, on the right side.
3 Explain the purpose, content, and preparation of the statement of cash flows.
The primary purpose of a statement of cash flows is to provide relevant information about a
company’s cash receipts and cash payments during a period. Reporting the sources, uses, and net
change in cash enables financial statement readers to know what is happening to a company’s most
liquid resource.

--- Page 423 ---
In the statement of cash flows, companies classify the period’s cash receipts and cash payments into
three different activities. (1) Operating activities: Involve the cash effects of transactions that enter
into the determination of net income. (2) Investing activities: Include making and collecting loans, and
acquiring and disposing of investments (both debt and equity) and of property, plant, and equipment.
(3) Financing activities: Involve liability and equity items. Financing activities include (a) obtaining
capital from owners and providing them with a return on their investment, and (b) borrowing money
from creditors and repaying the amounts borrowed.
The information to prepare the statement of cash flows usually comes from comparative statements
of financial position, the current income statement, and selected transaction data. Companies follow
four steps to prepare the statement of cash flows from these sources. (1) Determine the net cash
provided by (or used in) operating activities. (2) Determine the net cash provided by (or used in)
investing and financing activities. (3) Determine the change (increase or decrease) in cash during the
period. (4) Reconcile the change in cash with the beginning and ending cash balances.
Creditors examine the cash flow statement carefully because they are concerned about being paid.
The net cash flow provided by operating activities in relation to the company’s liabilities is helpful in
making this assessment. Two ratios used in this regard are the current cash debt coverage and the cash
debt coverage. In addition, the amount of free cash flow provides creditors and shareholders with a
picture of the company’s financial flexibility.
4 Describe additional types of information provided.
In addition to a complete set of financial statements, IFRS also requires additional reporting in the
notes to the financial statements. Disclosure in the notes includes (1) accounting policies and (2)
expanded disclosures and detailed schedules related to such items as property, plant, and equipment;
receivables; liabilities and provisions; and equity.
Companies use two methods to disclose pertinent information in the statement of financial
position. (1) Parenthetical explanations: Parenthetical explanations provide additional information or
description following the item. (2) Cross-reference and contra items: Companies “cross-reference” a
direct relationship between an asset and a liability on the statement of financial position. IFRS also
provides guidelines related to offsetting amounts (generally not permitted), consistency in application
of accounting policies, and “true and fair” presentation.
* 5 Identify the major types of financial ratios and what they measure.
Ratios express the mathematical relationship between one quantity and another, expressed as a
percentage, a rate, or a proportion. Liquidity ratios measure the short-term ability to pay maturing
obligations. Activity ratios measure the effectiveness of asset usage. Profitability ratios measure the
success or failure of an enterprise. Coverage ratios measure the degree of protection for long-term
creditors and investors.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions, and a full
glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Cassy Corporation’s statement of financial position at the end of 2021 included the following items.
Land
$ 36,000
Buildings
144,000

--- Page 424 ---
Equipment
108,000
Accumulated depreciation—buildings
(36,000)
Accumulated depreciation—equipment
(13,200)
Patents
48,000
Current assets
282,000
Total
$568,800
Share capital—ordinary
$216,000
Retained earnings
52,800
Bonds payable
120,000
Current liabilities
180,000
Total
$568,800
The following information is available for 2022.
1. Treasury shares were purchased at a cost of $13,200.
2. Cash dividends of $36,000 were declared and paid.
3. A long-term investment in shares was purchased for $19,200.
4. Current assets other than cash increased by $34,800. Current liabilities increased by $15,600.
5. Depreciation expense was $4,800 on the building and $10,800 on equipment.
6. Net income was $66,000.
7. Bonds payable of $60,000 were issued.
8. An addition to the building was completed at a cost of $32,400.
9. Patent amortization was $3,000.
10. Equipment (cost $24,000 and accumulated depreciation $9,600) was sold for $12,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of financial position at December 31, 2022.
b. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2022.
Solution
a. 
Cassy Corporation
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Long-term investments
$ 19,200
Property, plant, and equipment
Land
$ 36,000
Buildings ($144,000 + $32,400)
$176,400
Less: Accumulated depreciation—buildings ($36,000 + $4,800)
40,800
135,600
Equipment ($108,000 − $24,000)
84,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment ($13,200 − $9,600
14,400
69,600

--- Page 425 ---
+ $10,800)
Total property, plant, and equipment
241,200
Intangible assets—patents ($48,000 − $3,000)
45,000
Current assets ($282,000 + $34,800 + $39,000)
355,800
Total assets
$661,200
Equity and Liabilities
Equity
Share capital—ordinary
$216,000
Retained earnings ($52,800 + $66,000 − $36,000)
82,800
Total
298,800
Less: Cost of treasury shares
13,200
Total equity
$285,600
Non-current liabilities
Bonds payable ($120,000 + $60,000)
180,000
Current liabilities ($180,000 + $15,600)
195,600
Total liabilities
375,600
Total equity and liabilities
$661,200
Notes: The amount determined for current assets is computed last and is a “plug” figure. That is,
total equity and liabilities is computed because information is available to determine this amount.
Because the total assets amount is the same as the total equity and liabilities amount, the amount
of total assets can be determined. Information is available to compute all the asset amounts
except current assets. Therefore, current assets can be determined by deducting the total of all the
other asset balances from the total asset balance (i.e., $661,200 − $45,000 − $241,200 −
$19,200).
b. 
Cassy Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income
$66,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating
activities:
Loss on sale of equipment
$ 2,400
Depreciation expense
15,600
Patent amortization
3,000
Increase in current liabilities
15,600
Increase in current assets (other than cash)
(34,800)
1,800
Net cash provided by operating activities
67,800
Cash flows from investing activities
Sale of equipment
12,000
Addition to building
(32,400
Investment in shares
(19,200)
Net cash used by investing activities
(39,600)

--- Page 426 ---
Cash flows from financing activities
Issuance of bonds
60,000
Payment of dividends
(36,000)
Purchase of treasury shares
(13,200)
Net cash provided by financing activities
10,800
Net increase in cash
$39,000
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities, and many
more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. How does information from the statement of financial position help users of the financial
statements?
2. What is meant by solvency? What information in the statement of financial position can be used to
assess a company’s solvency?
3. A financial magazine indicated that the airline industry has poor financial flexibility. What is meant
by financial flexibility, and why is it important?
4. Discuss at least two situations in which estimates could affect the usefulness of information in the
statement of financial position.
5. Perez SA reported an increase in inventories in the past year. Discuss the effect of this change on the
current ratio (current assets ÷ current liabilities). What does this tell a statement user about Perez’s
liquidity?
6. What is meant by liquidity? Rank the following assets from one to five in order of liquidity.
a. Goodwill.
b. Inventory.
c. Buildings.
d. Short-term investments.
e. Accounts receivable.
7. What are the major limitations of the statement of financial position as a source of information?
8. Discuss at least two items that are important to the value of companies such as Louis Vuitton
(LVMH Group) (FRA) or adidas (DEU) but that are not recorded in their statements of financial
position. What are some reasons why these items are not recorded in the statement of financial
position?
9. How does separating current assets from property, plant, and equipment in the statement of
financial position help analysts?
10. In its December 31, 2022, statement of financial position, Oakley Corporation reported as an asset,
“Net notes and accounts receivable, €7,100,000.” What other disclosures are necessary?
11. Should non-trading equity securities always be reported as a current asset? Explain.
12. What is the relationship between current assets and current liabilities?
13. Manchester United sold 10,000 season tickets at £2,000 each. By December 31, 2022, 8 of the 20
home games had been played. What amount should be reported as a current liability at December 31,
2022?

--- Page 427 ---
14. What is working capital? How does working capital relate to the operating cycle?
15. In what section of the statement of financial position should the following items appear, and what
statement of financial position terminology would you use?
a. Treasury shares (recorded at cost).
b. Checking account at bank.
c. Land (held as an investment).
d. Sinking fund.
e. Provision for warranties (short-term).
f. Copyrights.
g. Pension fund assets.
h. Share capital—ordinary.
i. Long-term investments (pledged against bank loans payable).
j. Non-controlling interest.
16. Where should the following items be shown on the statement of financial position, if shown at all?
a. Allowance for doubtful accounts.
b. Merchandise held on consignment.
c. Advances received on sales contract.
d. Accumulated other comprehensive income.
e. Land.
f. Merchandise out on consignment.
g. Franchises.
h. Accumulated depreciation of plant and equipment.
i. Materials in transit—purchased f.o.b. destination.
17. State the usual basis of valuation of each of the following assets.
a. Trade accounts receivable.
b. Land.
c. Inventory.
d. Trading securities (ordinary shares of other companies).
e. Prepaid expenses.
18. Refer to the definition of assets in this chapter. Discuss how a leased building might qualify as an
asset of the lessee (tenant) under this definition.
19. Kathleen Battle says, “Retained earnings should be reported as an asset, since it is earnings which
are reinvested in the business.” How would you respond to Battle?
20. The creditors of Chan Ho Ltd. agree to accept promissory notes for the amount of its indebtedness
with a condition that two-thirds of the annual profits must be applied to their liquidation. How should
these notes be reported on the statement of financial position of the issuing company? Give a reason
for your answer.

--- Page 428 ---
21. What is the purpose of a statement of cash flows? How does it differ from a statement of financial
position and a statement of comprehensive income?
22. The net income for the year for Genesis plc is £750,000, but the statement of cash flows reports
that net cash provided by operating activities is £640,000. What might account for the difference?
23. Net income for the year for Carrie, Inc. was $750,000, but the statement of cash flows reports that
net cash provided by operating activities was $860,000. What might account for the difference?
24. Differentiate between operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities.
25. Each of the following items must be considered in preparing a statement of cash flows. Indicate
where each item is to be reported in the statement, if at all. Assume that net income is reported as
¥90,000 (amounts in thousands).
a. Accounts receivable increased from ¥34,000 to ¥39,000 from the beginning to the end of the year.
b. During the year, 10,000 ordinary shares with a par value of ¥100 per share were issued at ¥115 per
share.
c. Depreciation expense amounted to ¥14,000, and intangible asset amortization amounted to
¥5,000.
d. Land increased from ¥10,000 to ¥30,000 due to purchase through issuance of long-term debt.
26. Sergey SpA has net cash provided by operating activities of €1,200,000. Its average current
liabilities for the period are €1,000,000, and its average total liabilities are €1,500,000. Comment on
the company’s liquidity and financial flexibility given this information.
27. Net income for the year for Tanizaki, Inc. was $750,000, but the statement of cash flows reports
that net cash provided by operating activities was $860,000. Tanizaki also reported capital
expenditures of $75,000 and paid dividends in the amount of $30,000. Compute Tanizaki’s free cash
flow.
28. What is the purpose of a free cash flow analysis?
29. What is a “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”?
30. What are some of the techniques of disclosure for financial statement information?
Brief Exercises
BE5.1 (LO 1, 2) Harding NV has the following accounts included in its December 31, 2022, trial
balance: Accounts Receivable €110,000, Inventory €290,000, Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
€8,000, Patents €72,000, Prepaid Insurance €9,500, Accounts Payable €77,000, and Cash €30,000.
Prepare the current assets section of the statement of financial position, listing the accounts in the
sequence shown in the chapter.
BE5.2 (LO 1, 2) Koch AG’s adjusted trial balance contained the following asset accounts at December
31, 2022: Cash €7,000, Land €40,000, Patents €12,500, Accounts Receivable €90,000, Prepaid
Insurance €5,200, Inventory €30,000, Allowance for Doubtful Accounts €4,000, and Trading
Securities €11,000. Prepare the current assets section of the statement of financial position, listing the
accounts in the sequence shown in the chapter.
BE5.3 (LO 1, 2) Included in Outkast Company’s December 31, 2022, trial balance are the following
accounts: Prepaid Rent $5,200, Held-for-Collection Securities $56,000, Unearned Service Revenue
$17,000, Land Held for Investment $39,000, and Notes Receivable (long-term) $42,000. Prepare the
long-term investments section of the statement of financial position.
BE5.4 (LO 1, 2) Lowell Company’s December 31, 2022, trial balance includes the following accounts:
Inventory $120,000, Buildings $207,000, Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment $19,000, Equipment
$190,000, Land Held for Investment $46,000, Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings $45,000, and

--- Page 429 ---
Land $71,000. Prepare the property, plant, and equipment section of the statement of financial
position.
BE5.5 (LO 1, 2) Crane Ltd. has the following accounts included in its December 31, 2022, trial
balance: Trading Securities £21,000, Goodwill £150,000, Prepaid Insurance £12,000, Patents
£220,000, and Franchises £130,000. Prepare the intangible assets section of the statement of financial
position.
BE5.6 (LO 1, 2) Patrick Corporation’s adjusted trial balance contained the following asset accounts at
December 31, 2022: Capitalized Development Costs $18,000, Prepaid Rent $12,000, Goodwill $50,000,
Franchise Fees Receivable $2,000, Franchises $47,000, Patents $33,000, and Trademarks $10,000.
Prepare the intangible assets section of the statement of financial position.
BE5.7 (LO 1, 2) Thomas Corporation’s adjusted trial balance contained the following liability
accounts at December 31, 2022. Bonds Payable (due in 3 years) $100,000, Accounts Payable $72,000,
Notes Payable (due in 90 days) $22,500, Salaries and Wages Payable $4,000, and Income Taxes
Payable $7,000. Prepare the current liabilities section of the statement of financial position.
BE5.8 (LO 1, 2) Included in Arco A.¸S.’s December 31, 2022, trial balance are the following accounts:
Accounts Payable 220,000, Pension Liability 375,000, Advances from Customers 41,000, Bonds
Payable 371,000, Salaries and Wages Payable 27,000, Interest Payable 12,000, Income Taxes
Payable 29,000, and Provision for Warranties (current 3,000, non-current 6,000). Prepare the
current liabilities section of the statement of financial position.
BE5.9 (LO 1, 2) Use the information presented in BE5.8 for Arco A.¸S. to prepare the non-current
liabilities section of the statement of financial position.
BE5.10 (LO 1, 2) Hawthorn AG’s adjusted trial balance contained the following accounts at December
31, 2022: Retained Earnings €120,000, Share Capital—Ordinary €750,000, Bonds Payable €100,000,
Share Premium—Ordinary €200,000, Goodwill €55,000, Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
(Loss) €(150,000), and Non-Controlling Interest €80,000. Prepare the equity section of the statement
of financial position.
BE5.11 (LO 1, 2) Stowe SE’s December 31, 2022, trial balance includes the following accounts: Share
Capital—Ordinary €70,000, Retained Earnings €114,000, Trademarks €31,000, Share Capital—
Preference €152,000, Trading Securities €55,000, Deferred Income Taxes €88,000, Share Premium—
Ordinary €174,000, and Non-Controlling Interest €18,000. Prepare the equity section of the statement
of financial position.
BE5.12 (LO 3) Keyser Beverage reported the following items in the most recent year.
Net income
$40,000
Dividends paid
5,000
Increase in accounts receivable
10,000
Increase in accounts payable
7,000
Purchase of equipment (capital expenditure)
8,000
Depreciation expense
4,000
Issue of notes payable
20,000
Compute net cash provided by operating activities, the net change in cash during the year, and free
cash flow.
BE5.13 (LO 3) Ames Ltd. reported 2022 net income of HK$151,000. During 2022, accounts receivable
increased by HK$13,000 and accounts payable increased by HK$9,500. Depreciation expense was
HK$44,000. Prepare the cash flows from operating activities section of the statement of cash flows
(amounts in thousands).
BE5.14 (LO 3) Martinez SA engaged in the following cash transactions during 2022.

--- Page 430 ---
Sale of land and building
R$191,000
Purchase of treasury shares
40,000
Purchase of land
37,000
Payment of cash dividend
95,000
Purchase of equipment
53,000
Issuance of ordinary shares
147,000
Retirement of bonds
100,000
Compute the net cash provided (used) by investing activities.
BE5.15 (LO 3) Use the information presented in BE5.14 for Martinez SA to compute the net cash
provided (used) by financing activities.
BE5.16 (LO 3) Using the information in BE5.14, determine Martinez SA’s free cash flow, assuming
that it reported net cash provided by operating activities of R$400,000.
Exercises
E5.1 (LO 1, 2) (Statement of Financial Position Classifications) Presented below are a number
of statement of financial position accounts of Cunningham plc.
a. Investment in Preference Shares.
b. Treasury Shares.
c. Share Capital—Ordinary.
d. Dividends Payable.
e. Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment.
f. Finished Goods.
g. Petty Cash.
h. Interest Payable.
i. Deficit.
j. Trading Securities.
k. Income Taxes Payable.
l. Unearned Service Revenue.
m. Work in Process.
n. Salaries and Wages Payable.
Instructions
For each of the accounts above, indicate the proper statement of financial position classification. In the
case of borderline items, indicate the additional information that would be required to determine the
proper classification.
E5.2 (LO 1, 2) (Classification of Statement of Financial Position Accounts) Presented below
are the captions of Nikos SpAʼs statement of financial position.
a. Non-current assets.
1. Investments.
2. Property, plant, and equipment.
3. Intangible assets.

--- Page 431 ---
4. Other assets.
b. Current assets.
c. Equity.
d. Non-current liabilities.
e. Current liabilities.
Instructions
Indicate by letter where each of the following items would be classified.
1. Share capital—preference.
2. Goodwill.
3. Salaries and wages payable.
4. Accounts payable.
5. Buildings.
6. Trading securities.
7. Current portion of long-term debt.
8. Patents.
9. Allowance for doubtful accounts.
10. Accounts receivable.
11. Accumulated other comprehensive income.
12. Notes payable (due next year).
13. Supplies.
14. Share capital—ordinary.
15. Land.
16. Bond sinking fund.
17. Inventory.
18. Prepaid insurance.
19. Bonds payable.
20. Income taxes payable.
E5.3 (LO 1, 2) (Classification of Statement of Financial Position Accounts) Assume that
Masters Enterprises uses the following headings on its statement of financial position.
a. Investments.
b. Property, plant, and equipment.
c. Intangible assets.
d. Other assets.
e. Current assets.
f. Non-current liabilities.
g. Current liabilities.
h. Share capital.

--- Page 432 ---
i. Share premium.
j. Retained earnings.
k. Accumulated other comprehensive income.
Instructions
Indicate by letter how each of the following usually should be classified. If an item should be reported
in a note to the financial statements, use the letter “N” to indicate this fact. If an item need not be
reported at all on the statement of financial position, use the letter “X.”
1. Prepaid insurance.
2. Shares owned in associated companies.
3. Unearned service revenue.
4. Advances to suppliers.
5. Unearned rent revenue.
6. Share capital—preference.
7. Share premium—preference.
8. Copyrights.
9. Petty cash fund.
10. Sales taxes payable.
11. Interest on notes receivable.
12. Twenty-year bonds payable that will mature within the next year. (No sinking fund exists, and
refunding is not planned.)
13. Accounts receivable.
14. Unrealized gain on non-trading equity securities.
15. Interest on bonds payable.
16. Salaries that company budget shows will be paid to employees within the next year.
17. Accumulated depreciation—equipment.
E5.4 (LO 1, 2) (Preparation of a Classified Statement of Financial Position) Assume that
Gulistan AG has the following accounts at the end of the current year.
1. Share Capital—Ordinary.
2. Notes Payable (long-term).
3. Treasury Shares (at cost).
4. Note Payable (short-term).
5. Raw Materials.
6. Long-Term Investment in Preference Shares.
7. Unearned Rent Revenue.
8. Work in Process.
9. Copyrights.
10. Buildings.
11. Notes Receivable (short-term).

--- Page 433 ---
12. Cash.
13. Salaries and Wages Payable.
14. Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings.
15. Cash Restricted for Plant Expansion.
16. Land Held for Future Plant Site.
17. Allowance for Doubtful Accounts (Accounts Receivable).
18. Retained Earnings.
19. Share Premium—Ordinary.
20. Unearned Service Revenue.
21. Receivables—Officers (due in 1 year).
22. Finished Goods.
23. Accounts Receivable.
24. Bonds Payable (due in 4 years).
Instructions
Prepare a classified statement of financial position in good form. (No monetary amounts are
necessary.)
E5.5 (LO 1, 2) (Preparation of a Corrected Statement of Financial Position) Bruno SpA has
decided to expand its operations. The bookkeeper recently completed the following statement of
financial position in order to obtain additional funds for expansion.
Bruno SpA
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Current assets
Cash
€260,000
Accounts receivable (net)
340,000
Inventory (at lower-of-average-cost-or-net realizable value)
401,000
Trading securities—at cost (fair value €120,000)
140,000
Property, plant, and equipment
Buildings (net)
570,000
Equipment (net)
160,000
Land held for future use
175,000
Other assets
Goodwill
80,000
Intangible assets
90,000
Prepaid expenses
12,000
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
135,000
Notes payable (due next year)
125,000
Pension liability
82,000
Rent payable
49,000
Premium on bonds payable
53,000

--- Page 434 ---
Non-current liabilities
Bonds payable
500,000
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, €1.00 par, authorized 400,000 shares, issued 290,000
290,000
Share premium—ordinary
180,000
Retained earnings
?
Instructions
Prepare a revised statement of financial position given the available information. Assume that the
accumulated depreciation balance for the buildings is €160,000 and for the equipment, €105,000. The
allowance for doubtful accounts has a balance of €17,000. The pension liability is considered a non-
current liability.
E5.6 (LO 1, 2) (Corrections of a Statement of Financial Position) The bookkeeper for Liba Ltd.
has prepared the following statement of financial position as of July 31, 2022 (amounts in thousands).
Liba Ltd.
Statement of Financial Position
As of July 31, 2022
Equipment (net)
¥ 84,000 Equity
¥155,500
Patents
21,000 Non-current liabilities
75,000
Inventory
60,000 Notes and accounts payable
44,000
Accounts receivable (net)
40,500
¥274,500
Cash
69,000
¥274,500
The following additional information is provided.
1. Cash includes ¥1,200 in a petty cash fund and ¥12,000 in a bond sinking fund.
2. The net accounts receivable balance is comprised of the following three items: (a) accounts
receivable—debit balances ¥52,000, (b) accounts receivable—credit balances ¥8,000 (customer
prepayments), and (c) allowance for doubtful accounts ¥3,500.
3. Inventory costing ¥5,300 was shipped out on consignment on July 31, 2022. The ending inventory
balance does not include the consigned goods. Receivables in the amount of ¥5,300 were
recognized on these consigned goods.
4. Equipment had a cost of ¥112,000 and an accumulated depreciation balance of ¥28,000.
5. Income taxes payable of ¥9,000 were accrued on July 31. Liba Ltd., however, had set up a cash
fund to meet this obligation. This cash fund was not included in the cash balance but was offset
against the income taxes payable amount.
Instructions
Prepare a corrected classified statement of financial position as of July 31, 2022, from the available
information, adjusting the account balances using the additional information.
E5.7 (LO 1, 2) (Current Assets Section of the Statement of Financial Position) Presented
below are selected accounts of Aramis SE at December 31, 2022.
Inventory (finished goods)
€ 52,000 Cost of Goods Sold
€2,100,000
Unearned Service Revenue
90,000 Notes Receivable
40,000
Equipment
253,000 Accounts Receivable
161,000

--- Page 435 ---
Inventory (work in process)
34,000 Inventory (raw materials)
187,000
Cash
42,000 Supplies Expense
60,000
Trading Securities
31,000 Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
12,000
Customer Advances
36,000 Licenses
18,000
Cash Restricted for Plant Expansion
50,000 Share Premium—Ordinary
88,000
Treasury Shares
22,000
The following additional information is available.
1. Inventory is valued at lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value using FIFO.
2. Equipment is recorded at cost. Accumulated depreciation, computed on a straight-line basis, is
€50,600.
3. The trading securities have a fair value of €29,000.
4. The notes receivable are due April 30, 2024, with interest receivable every April 30. The notes bear
interest at 6%. (Hint: Accrue interest due on December 31, 2022.)
5. The allowance for doubtful accounts applies to the accounts receivable. Accounts receivable of
€50,000 are pledged as collateral on a bank loan.
6. Licenses are recorded net of accumulated amortization of €14,000.
7. Treasury shares are recorded at cost.
Instructions
Prepare the current assets section of Aramis SE’s December 31, 2022, statement of financial position,
with appropriate disclosures.
E5.8 (LO 1, 2) (Current vs. Non-Current Liabilities) Pascal Corporation is preparing its
December 31, 2022, statement of financial position. The following items may be reported as either a
current or non-current liability.
1. On December 15, 2022, Pascal declared a cash dividend of $2 per share to shareholders of record
on December 31. The dividend is payable on January 15, 2023. Pascal has issued 1,000,000
ordinary shares of which 50,000 shares are held in treasury.
2. At December 31, bonds payable of $100,000,000 are outstanding. The bonds pay 8% interest every
September 30 and mature in installments of $25,000,000 every September 30, beginning
September 30, 2023.
3. At December 31, 2021, customer advances were $12,000,000. During 2022, Pascal collected
$30,000,000 of customer advances; advances of $25,000,000 represent performance obligations,
which have been satisfied.
Instructions
For each item above, indicate the dollar amounts to be reported as a current liability and as a non-
current liability, if any.
E5.9 (LO 1, 2) (Current Assets and Current Liabilities) The current assets and current liabilities
sections of the statement of financial position of Jin Liu Ltd. appear as follows (amounts in
thousands).
Jin Liu Ltd.
Statement of Financial Position (partial)
December 31, 2022
Inventory
¥171,000 Notes payable
¥ 67,000

--- Page 436 ---
Accounts receivable
¥89,000
Accounts payable
61,000
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
7,000
82,000
¥ 128,000
Prepaid expenses
9,000
Cash
40,000
¥302,000
The following errors in the company’s accounting have been discovered:
1. January 2023 cash disbursements entered as of December 2022 included payments of accounts
payable in the amount of ¥35,000, on which a cash discount of 2% was taken.
2. The inventory included ¥27,000 of merchandise that had been received at December 31 but for
which no purchase invoices had been received or entered. Of this amount, ¥10,000 had been
received on consignment; the remainder was purchased f.o.b. destination, terms 2/10, n/30.
3. Sales for the first four days in January 2023 in the amount of ¥30,000 were entered in the sales
book as of December 31, 2022. Of these, ¥21,500 were sales on account and the remainder were
cash sales.
4. Cash, not including cash sales, collected in January 2023 and entered as of December 31, 2022,
totaled ¥35,324. Of this amount, ¥23,324 was received on account after cash discounts of 2% had
been deducted; the remainder represented the proceeds of a bank loan.
Instructions
a. Restate the current assets and current liabilities sections of the statement of financial position in
accordance with good accounting practice. (Assume that both accounts receivable and accounts
payable are recorded gross.)
b. State the net effect of your adjustments on Jin Liu Ltd.’s retained earnings balance.
E5.10 (LO 1, 2) (Current Liabilities) Mary Pierce is the controller of Arnold Corporation and is
responsible for the preparation of the year-end financial statements. The following transactions
occurred during the year.
a. Bonuses to key employees based on net income for 2022 are estimated to be $150,000.
b. On December 1, 2022, the company borrowed $900,000 at 8% per year. Interest is paid quarterly.
c. Credit sales for the year amounted to $10,000,000. Arnold’s expense provision for doubtful
accounts is estimated to be 2% of credit sales.
d. On December 15, 2022, the company declared a $2 per share dividend on the 40,000 ordinary
shares outstanding, to be paid on January 5, 2023.
e. During the year, customer advances of $160,000 were received; $50,000 of this amount was
earned by December 31, 2022.
Instructions
For each item above, indicate the dollar amount to be reported as a current liability. If a liability is not
reported, explain why.
E5.11 (LO 1, 2) (Statement of Financial Position Preparation) Presented below is the adjusted
trial balance of Abbey plc at December 31, 2022.
Debit
Credit
Cash
£
?
Supplies
1,200

--- Page 437 ---
Prepaid Insurance
1,000
Equipment
48,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
£ 9,000
Trademarks
950
Accounts Payable
10,000
Salaries and Wages Payable
500
Unearned Service Revenue
2,000
Bonds Payable (due 2025)
9,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
10,000
Retained Earnings
20,000
Service Revenue
10,000
Salaries and Wages Expense
9,000
Insurance Expense
1,400
Rent Expense
1,200
Interest Expense
900
Total
£
?
£
?
Additional information:
1. Net loss for the year was £2,500.
2. No dividends were declared during 2022.
Instructions
Prepare a classified statement of financial position as of December 31, 2022.
E5.12 (LO 1, 2) (Preparation of a Statement of Financial Position) Presented below is the trial
balance of Vivaldi SpA at December 31, 2022.
Debit
Credit
Cash
€
197,000
Sales Revenue
€ 7,900,000
Trading Securities (at cost, €145,000)
153,000
Cost of Goods Sold
4,800,000
Long-term Investments in Bonds
299,000
Long-term Investments in Shares
277,000
Notes Payable (short-term)
90,000
Accounts Payable
455,000
Selling Expenses
2,000,000
Investment Revenue
63,000
Land
260,000
Buildings
1,040,000
Dividends Payable
136,000
Accrued Liabilities
96,000
Accounts Receivable
435,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings
352,000

--- Page 438 ---
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
25,000
Administrative Expenses
900,000
Interest Expense
211,000
Inventory
597,000
Pension Liability (long-term)
80,000
Notes Payable (long-term)
900,000
Equipment
600,000
Bonds Payable
1,000,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
60,000
Franchises
160,000
Share Capital—Ordinary (€5 par)
1,000,000
Treasury Shares
191,000
Patents
195,000
Retained Earnings
78,000
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
80,000
Total
€12,315,000 €12,315,000
Instructions
Prepare a statement of financial position at December 31, 2022, for Vivaldi SpA. (Ignore income taxes.)
E5.13 (LO 3) (Statement of Cash Flows—Classifications) The major classifications of activities
reported in the statement of cash flows are operating, investing, and financing. Classify each of the
transactions listed below as:
1. Operating activity—add to net income.
2. Operating activity—deduct from net income.
3. Investing activity.
4. Financing activity.
5. Reported as significant non-cash activity in the notes to the financial statements.
The transactions are as follows.
a. Issuance of ordinary shares.
b. Purchase of land and building.
c. Redemption of bonds.
d. Sale of equipment.
e. Depreciation of machinery.
f. Amortization of patent.
g. Issuance of bonds for plant assets.
h. Payment of cash dividends.
i. Exchange of furniture for office equipment.
j. Purchase of treasury shares.
k. Loss on sale of equipment.
l. Increase in accounts receivable during the year.

--- Page 439 ---
m. Decrease in accounts payable during the year.
E5.14 (LO 3) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows) The comparative statements of
financial position of Lopez Inc. at the beginning and the end of the year 2022 appear as follows.
Lopez Inc.
Statements of Financial Position
Assets
Dec. 31, 2022 Jan. 1, 2022 Inc./Dec.
Equipment
$ 39,000
$ 22,000 $17,000 Inc.
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
(17,000)
(11,000)
6,000 Inc.
Accounts receivable
91,000
88,000
3,000 Inc.
Cash
45,000
13,000 32,000 Inc.
Total
$158,000
$112,000
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital—ordinary
$100,000
$ 80,000 20,000 Inc.
Retained earnings
38,000
17,000
21,000 Inc.
Accounts payable
20,000
15,000
5,000 Inc.
Total
$158,000
$112,000
Net income of $34,000 was reported, and dividends of $13,000 were paid in 2022. New equipment was
purchased and none was sold.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of cash flows for the year 2022.
E5.15 (LO 3) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows) Presented below is a condensed
version of the comparative statements of financial position for Yoon Ltd. for the last 2 years at
December 31 (amounts in millions).
2022
2021
Investments
₩ 52,000 ₩ 74,000
Equipment
298,000
240,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
(106,000)
(89,000)
Accounts receivable
180,000
185,000
Cash
157,000
78,000
Share capital—ordinary
160,000
160,000
Retained earnings
287,000
177,000
Current liabilities
134,000
151,000
Additional information:
Investments were sold at a loss of ₩ 7,000; no equipment was sold; cash dividends paid were ₩
50,000; and net income was ₩ 160,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2022 for Yoon Ltd.
b. Determine Yoon’s free cash flow.
E5.16 (LO 3) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows) A comparative statement of financial
position for Orozco AG is presented below.

--- Page 440 ---
December 31
Assets
2022
2021
Land
€ 71,000 €110,000
Equipment
270,000
200,000
Accumulated depreciation—equipment (69,000) (42,000)
Inventory
180,000
189,000
Accounts receivable
82,000
66,000
Cash
63,000
22,000
Total
€597,000 €545,000
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital—ordinary (€1 par)
€214,000 €164,000
Retained earnings
199,000
134,000
Bonds payable
150,000
200,000
Accounts payable
34,000
47,000
Total
€597,000 €545,000
Additional information:
1. Net income for 2022 was €105,000.
2. Cash dividends of €40,000 were declared and paid.
3. Bonds payable amounting to €50,000 were retired through issuance of ordinary shares.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2022 for Orozco AG.
b. Determine Orozco’s current cash debt coverage, cash debt coverage, and free cash flow. Comment
on its liquidity and financial flexibility.
E5.17 (LO 1, 2, 3) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows and a Statement of Financial
Position) Chekov Corporation’s statement of financial position at the end of 2021 included the
following items.
Land
$ 30,000 Bonds payable
$100,000
Buildings
120,000 Current liabilities
150,000
Equipment
90,000 Share capital—ordinary
180,000
Accum. depr.—buildings
(30,000) Retained earnings
44,000
Accum. depr.—equipment
(11,000)
Total
$474,000
Patents
40,000
Current assets
235,000
Total
$474,000
The following information is available for 2022.
1. Net income was $55,000.
2. Equipment (cost $20,000 and accumulated depreciation $8,000) was sold for $9,000.
3. Depreciation expense was $4,000 on the building and $9,000 on equipment.
4. Patent amortization was $2,500.

--- Page 441 ---
5. Current assets other than cash increased by $25,000. Current liabilities increased by $13,000.
6. An addition to the building was completed at a cost of $27,000.
7. A long-term investment in debt securities was purchased for $16,000.
8. Bonds payable of $50,000 were issued.
9. Cash dividends of $25,000 were declared and paid.
10. Treasury shares were purchased at a cost of $11,000.
Instructions
(Show only totals for current assets and current liabilities.)
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2022.
b. Prepare a statement of financial position at December 31, 2022.
E5.18 (LO 3, 4) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows, Analysis) The comparative
statements of financial position of Menachem NV at the beginning and end of the year 2022 appear
below.
Menachem NV
Statements of Financial Position
Assets
Dec. 31, 2022 Jan. 1, 2022
Inc./Dec.
Equipment
€ 37,000
€ 22,000 €15,000 Inc.
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
(17,000)
(11,000)
6,000 Inc.
Accounts receivable
106,000
88,000
18,000 Inc.
Cash
22,000
13,000
9,000 Inc.
Total
€148,000
€112,000
Equity and Liabilities
Share capital—ordinary
€100,000
€ 80,000
20,000 Inc.
Retained earnings
28,000
17,000
11,000 Inc.
Accounts payable
20,000
15,000
5,000 Inc.
Total
€148,000
€112,000
Net income of €34,000 was reported, and dividends of €23,000 were paid in 2022. New equipment was
purchased and none was sold.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for the year 2022.
b. Compute the current ratio (current assets ÷ current liabilities) as of January 1, 2022, and
December 31, 2022, and compute free cash flow for the year 2022.
c. In light of the analysis in (b), comment on Menachem’s liquidity and financial flexibility.
Problems
P5.1 (LO 2) (Preparation of a Classified Statement of Financial Position, Periodic
Inventory) Presented below is a list of accounts in alphabetical order.
Accounts Receivable
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings

--- Page 442 ---
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Advances to Employees
Advertising Expense
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Bond Sinking Fund
Bonds Payable
Buildings
Cash (in bank)
Cash (on hand)
Commission Expense
Copyrights
Delivery Expense
Dividends Payable
Equipment
Gain on Sale of Equipment
Interest Receivable
Inventory (beginning)
Inventory (ending)
Land
Land for Future Plant Site
Loss from Flood
Non-Controlling Interest
Notes Payable (due next year)
Patents
Payroll Taxes Payable
Pension Liability
Petty Cash
Prepaid Rent
Purchase Returns and Allowances
Purchases
Retained Earnings
Salaries and Wages Expense (sales)
Salaries and Wages Payable
Sales Discounts
Sales Revenue
Share Capital—Ordinary
Share Capital—Preference
Share Premium—Ordinary

--- Page 443 ---
Trading Securities
Treasury Shares (at cost)
Unearned Service Revenue
Instructions
Prepare a classified statement of financial position in good form. (No monetary amounts are to be
shown.)
P5.2 (LO 1, 2) (Statement of Financial Position Preparation) Presented below are a number of
statement of financial position items for Montoya SA, for the current year, 2022.
Goodwill
€ 125,000 Inventory
€ 239,800
Payroll taxes payable
177,591 Rent payable (short-term)
45,000
Bonds payable
285,000 Income taxes payable
98,362
Cash
360,000 Long-term rental obligations
480,000
Land
480,000 Share capital—ordinary, 
€1 par value
200,000
Notes receivable
445,700
Notes payable (to banks)
265,000
Share capital—preference, €10 par
value
150,000
Accounts payable
490,000 Prepaid expenses
87,920
Retained earnings
? Equipment
1,470,000
Income taxes receivable
97,630 Trading securities
121,000
Unsecured notes payable (long-term)
1,600,000 Accumulated depreciation— buildings
270,200
Accumulated depreciation—
equipment
292,000 Buildings
1,640,000
Instructions
Prepare a classified statement of financial position in good form. Share capital—ordinary shares
authorized was 400,000 shares, and share capital—preference shares authorized was 20,000 shares.
Assume that notes receivable and notes payable are short-term, unless stated otherwise. Cost and fair
value of trading securities are the same.
P5.3 (LO 1, 2) (Statement of Financial Position Adjustment and Preparation) The adjusted
trial balance of Asian-Pacific Ltd. and other related information for the year 2022 are presented below
(amounts in thousands).
Asian-Pacific Ltd.
Adjusted Trial Balance
December 31, 2022
Debit
Credit
Cash
¥
41,000
Accounts Receivable
163,500
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
¥
8,700
Prepaid Insurance
5,900
Inventory
208,500
Long-term Investments
339,000
Land
85,000
Construction in Process
124,000

--- Page 444 ---
Patents
36,000
Equipment
400,000
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
240,000
Accounts Payable
148,000
Accrued Expenses
49,200
Notes Payable
94,000
Bonds Payable
180,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
500,000
Share Premium—Ordinary
45,000
Retained Earnings
         
138,000
¥1,402,900 ¥1,402,900
Additional information:
1. The average-cost method of inventory value is used.
2. The cost and fair value of the long-term investments that consist of ordinary shares and bonds are
the same.
3. The amount of the Construction in Process account represents the costs expended to date on a
building in the process of construction. (The company rents factory space at the present time.) The
land on which the building is being constructed cost ¥85,000, as shown in the trial balance.
4. The patents were purchased by the company at a cost of ¥40,000 and are being amortized on a
straight-line basis.
5. The notes payable represent bank loans that are secured by long-term investments carried at
¥120,000. These bank loans are due in 2023.
6. The bonds payable bear interest at 8% payable every December 31, and are due January 1, 2033.
7. 600,000 ordinary shares with a par value of ¥1 were authorized, of which 500,000 shares were
issued and outstanding.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of financial position as of December 31, 2022, so that all important information is
fully disclosed.
P5.4 (LO 1, 2) 
 (Preparation of a Corrected Statement of Financial Position) The
statement of financial position of Kishwaukee Ltd. as of December 31, 2022, is as follows.
Kishwaukee Ltd.
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Goodwill (Note 1)
£ 120,000
Buildings
1,640,000
Inventory
312,100
Land
950,000
Accounts receivable
170,000
Treasury shares (50,000 shares)
87,000
Cash on hand
175,900

--- Page 445 ---
Assets allocated to trustee for plant expansion
Cash in bank
70,000
Treasury notes, at cost and fair value
138,000
£3,663,000
Equities
Notes payable (Note 2)
£ 600,000
Share capital—ordinary, authorized and issued, 1,000,000 shares, no par
1,150,000
Retained earnings
858,000
Non-controlling interest
570,000
Income taxes payable
75,000
Accumulated depreciation—buildings
410,000
£3,663,000
Note 1: Goodwill in the amount of £120,000 was recognized because the company believed that book
value was not an accurate representation of the fair value of the company. The gain of £120,000 was
credited to Retained Earnings.
Note 2: Notes payable are non-current except for the current installment due of £100,000.
Instructions
Prepare a corrected classified statement of financial position in good form. The notes above are for
information only.
P5.5 (LO 1, 2) 
 (Statement of Financial Position Adjustment and Preparation)
Presented below is the statement of financial position of Sargent Corporation for the current year,
2022.
Sargent Corporation
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Investments
$ 640,000 Equity
$1,770,000
Property, plant, and equipment
1,720,000 Non-current liabilities
960,000
Intangible assets
265,000 Current liabilities
380,000
Current assets
485,000
$3,110,000
$3,110,000
The following information is presented.
1. The current assets section includes cash $150,000, accounts receivable $170,000 less $10,000 for
allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory $180,000, and unearned service revenue $5,000.
Inventory is stated at the lower-of-FIFO-cost-or-net-realizable value.
2. The investments section includes land held for speculation $40,000; investments in ordinary
shares, short-term (trading) $80,000 and long-term (non-trading) $270,000; and bond sinking
fund $250,000. The cost and fair value of investments in ordinary shares are the same.
3. Property, plant, and equipment includes buildings $1,040,000 less accumulated depreciation
$360,000, equipment $450,000 less accumulated depreciation $180,000, land $500,000, and land
held for future use $270,000.
4. Intangible assets include a franchise $165,000 and goodwill $100,000.

--- Page 446 ---
5. Current liabilities include accounts payable $140,000; notes payable—short-term $80,000 and
long-term $120,000; and income taxes payable $40,000.
6. Non-current liabilities are composed solely of 7% bonds payable due 2030.
7. Equity as shown includes share capital—preference, $5 par value, authorized 200,000 shares,
issued 90,000 shares for $450,000; and share capital—ordinary, $1 par value, authorized 400,000
shares, issued 100,000 shares at an average price of $10. In addition, the company has retained
earnings of $320,000.
Instructions
Prepare a statement of financial position in good form, adjusting the amounts in each statement of
financial position classification as affected by the information given above.
P5.6 (LO 1, 2, 3) (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows and a Statement of Financial
Position) Lansbury Inc. had the statement of financial position shown below at December 31, 2021.
Lansbury Inc.
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2021
Investments
$ 32,000 Share capital—ordinary
$100,000
Plant assets (net)
81,000 Retained earnings
23,200
Land
40,000 Long-term notes payable
41,000
Accounts receivable
21,200 Accounts payable
30,000
Cash
20,000
$194,200
$194,200
During 2022, the following occurred.
1. Lansbury Inc. sold part of its investment portfolio for $15,000. This transaction resulted in a gain
of $3,400 for the firm. The company classifies its investments as non-trading equity.
2. A tract of land was purchased for $18,000 cash.
3. Long-term notes payable in the amount of $16,000 were retired before maturity by paying $16,000
cash.
4. An additional $20,000 in ordinary shares were issued at par.
5. Dividends totalling $8,200 were declared and paid to shareholders.
6. Net income for 2022 was $32,000 after allowing for depreciation of $11,000.
7. Land was purchased through the issuance of $30,000 in bonds.
8. At December 31, 2022, Cash was $32,000, Accounts Receivable was $41,600, and Accounts Payable
remained at $30,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for 2022.
b. Prepare a statement of financial position as it would appear at December 31, 2022.
c. How might the statement of cash flows help the user of the financial statements? Compute free
cash flow and two cash flow ratios.
P5.7 (LO 1, 2, 3) 
 (Preparation of a Statement of Cash Flows and Statement of
Financial Position) Luo Ltd. had the following statement of financial position at December 31, 2021
(amounts in thousands).

--- Page 447 ---
Luo Ltd.
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2021
Investments
¥ 32,000 Share capital—ordinary ¥100,000
Plant assets (net)
81,000 Retained earnings
23,200
Land
40,000 Bonds payable
41,000
Accounts receivable
21,200 Accounts payable
30,000
Cash
20,000
¥194,200
¥194,200
During 2022, the following occurred.
1. Luo liquidated its non-trading equity investment portfolio at a loss of ¥5,000.
2. A tract of land was purchased for ¥38,000.
3. An additional ¥30,000 in ordinary shares were issued at par.
4. Dividends totaling ¥10,000 were declared and paid to shareholders.
5. Net income for 2022 was ¥35,000, including ¥12,000 in depreciation expense.
6. Land was purchased through the issuance of ¥30,000 in additional bonds.
7. At December 31, 2022, Cash was ¥70,200, Accounts Receivable was ¥42,000, and Accounts
Payable was ¥40,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a statement of cash flows for the year 2022 for Luo.
b. Prepare the statement of financial position as it would appear at December 31, 2022.
c. Compute Luo’s free cash flow and the current cash debt coverage for 2022.
d. Use the analysis of Luo to illustrate how information in the statement of financial position and
statement of cash flows helps the user of the financial statements.
Concepts for Analysis
CA5.1 (LO 2) (Reporting the Financial Effects of Varied Transactions) In an examination of
Arenes Corporation as of December 31, 2022, you have learned that the following situations exist. No
entries have been made in the accounting records for these items.
1. The company erected its present factory building in 2007. Depreciation was calculated by the
straight-line method, using an estimated life of 35 years. Early in 2022, the board of directors
conducted a careful survey and estimated that the factory building had a remaining useful life of
25 years as of January 1, 2022.
2. When calculating the accrual for officers’ salaries at December 31, 2022, it was discovered that the
accrual for officers’ salaries for December 31, 2021, had been overstated.
3. On December 15, 2022, Arenes Corporation declared a cash dividend on its ordinary shares
outstanding, payable February 1, 2023, to the shareholders of record December 31, 2022.
Instructions
Describe fully how each of the items above should be reported in the financial statements of Arenes
Corporation for the year 2022.

--- Page 448 ---
CA5.2 (LO 1, 2) (Current Asset and Liability Classification) Below are the titles of a number of
debit and credit accounts as they might appear on the statement of financial position of Hayduke ASA
as of October 31, 2022.
Debit
Credit
Interest Accrued on Government
Share Capital—Preference
Securities
6% First Mortgage Bonds, due in 2029
Notes Receivable
Preference Dividend, payable Nov. 1, 2022
Petty Cash Fund
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Government Securities
Income Taxes Payable
Treasury Shares
Customers’ Advances (on contracts to be completed next
year)
Cash in Bank
Land
Provision for Warranties
Inventory of Operating Parts and
Supplies
Officers’ 2022 Bonus Accrued
Inventory of Raw Materials
Accrued Payroll
Patents
Notes Payable
Cash and Government Bonds Set Aside
Accrued Interest on Bonds
for Property Additions
Accumulated Depreciation
Investment in Subsidiary
Accounts Payable
Accounts Receivable:
Share Premium—Preference
Government Contracts
Accrued Interest on Notes Payable
Regular
6½% First Mortgage Bonds, due in 2022 out of 
current assets
Goodwill
Inventory of Finished Goods
Non-Controlling Interest
Inventory of Work in Process
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (loss)
Deficit
Instructions
Select the current asset and current liability items from among these debit and credit accounts. If there
appear to be certain borderline cases that you are unable to classify without further information,
mention them and explain your difficulty, or give your reasons for making questionable classifications,
if any.
CA5.3 (LO 2) (Identifying Statement of Financial Position Deficiencies) The assets of
Fonzarelli SpA are presented as follows (amounts in thousands).
Fonzarelli SpA
Statement of Financial Position
(Partial) December 31, 2022
Assets
Current assets
Cash
€ 100,000
Non-controlling interest
27,500
Trading securities (fair value €30,000) at cost
37,000
Accounts receivable (less bad debt reserve)
75,000

--- Page 449 ---
Inventory—at lower-of-cost (determined by the first-in, first-out method)-
or-net realizable value
240,000
Total current assets
479,500
Tangible assets
Land (less accumulated depreciation)
80,000
Buildings and equipment
€800,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
250,000
550,000
Net tangible assets
630,000
Investments
Bonds
100,000
Treasury shares
70,000
Total investments
170,000
Other assets
Land held for future factory site
19,400
Sinking fund
975,000
Total other assets
994,400
Total assets
€2,273,900
Instructions
Indicate the deficiencies, if any, in the foregoing presentation of Fonzarelli’s assets.
CA5.4 (LO 1, 2, 3) 
 (Critique of Statement of Financial Position Format and
Content) The following is the statement of financial position of Rasheed Brothers Corporation
(amounts in thousands).
Rasheed Brothers Corporation
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Current assets
Cash
$26,000
Short-term investments
18,000
Accounts receivable
25,000
Inventory
20,000
Supplies
4,000
Investment in associated company
20,000 $113,000
Investments
Treasury shares
25,000
Property, plant, and equipment
Buildings and land
91,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
31,000
60,000
Other assets
Cash restricted for plant expansion
19,000
Total assets
$217,000

--- Page 450 ---
Liabilities and Equity
Current liabilities
Accounts payable
$22,000
Income taxes payable
15,000 $ 37,000
Deferred credits
Unrealized gains on non-trading equity investments
2,000
Non-current liabilities
Bonds payable
60,000
Total liabilities
99,000
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, par $5
85,000
Retained earnings
25,000
Cash dividends declared
8,000
118,000
Total liabilities and equity
$217,000
Instructions
Evaluate the statement of financial position presented. State briefly the proper treatment of any item
criticized.
CA5.5 (LO 1, 2, 4) 
 (Presentation of Property, Plant, and Equipment) Carol Keene,
comptroller for Dumaine Industries, is trying to decide how to present “Property, plant, and
equipment” in the statement of financial position. She realizes that the statement of cash flows will
show that the company made a significant investment in purchasing new equipment this year, but
overall she knows the company’s plant assets are rather old. She feels that she can disclose one figure
titled “Property, plant, and equipment, net of depreciation,” and the result will be a low figure.
However, it will not disclose the age of the assets. If she chooses to show the cost less accumulated
depreciation, the age of the assets will be apparent. She proposes the following.
Property, plant, and equipment, net of depreciation £ 10,000,000
rather than
Property, plant, and equipment
£ 50,000,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
(40,000,000)
Net book value
£ 10,000,000
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. What are the ethical issues involved?
b. What should Keene do?
CA5.6 (LO 3) 
 (Cash Flow Analysis) The partner in charge of the Kappeler Corporation
audit comes by your desk and leaves a letter he has started to the CEO and a copy of the cash flow
statement for the year ended December 31, 2022. Because he must leave on an emergency, he asks you
to finish the letter by explaining (1) the disparity between net income and cash flow, (2) the
importance of operating cash flow, (3) the renewable source(s) of cash flow, and (4) possible
suggestions to improve the cash position.
Kappeler Corporation
Statement of Cash Flows

--- Page 451 ---
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income
$100,000
Adjustments to reconcile net income to net cash provided by operating
activities:
Depreciation expense
$ 10,000
Amortization expense
1,000
Loss on sale of fixed assets
5,000
Increase in accounts receivable (net)
(40,000)
Increase in inventory
(35,000)
Decrease in accounts payable
(41,000)
(100,000)
Net cash provided by operating activities
–0–
Cash flows from investing activities
Sale of plant assets
25,000
Purchase of equipment
(100,000)
Purchase of land
(200,000)
Net cash used by investing activities
(275,000)
Cash flows from financing activities
Payment of dividends
(10,000)
Redemption of bonds
(100,000)
Net cash used by financing activities
(110,000)
Net decrease in cash
(385,000)
Cash balance, January 1, 2022
400,000
Cash balance, December 31, 2022
$ 15,000
Date
President Kappeler, CEO
Kappeler Corporation
125 Wall Street
Middleton, Kansas 67458
Dear Mr. Kappeler:
I have good news and bad news about the financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The good news is that net income of $100,000 is close to what you predicted in the strategic plan last
year, indicating strong performance this year. The bad news is that the cash balance is seriously low.
Enclosed is the Statement of Cash Flows, which best illustrates how both of these situations occurred
simultaneously …
Instructions
Complete the letter to the CEO, including the four components requested by your boss.
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)

--- Page 452 ---
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A. The company’s complete annual
report, including the notes to the financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to answer the following questions.
a. What alternative formats could M&S have adopted for its statement of financial position? Which
format did it adopt?
b. How much working capital did M&S have on March 30, 2019? On March 31, 2018?
c. What were M&S’s cash flows from its operating, investing, and financing activities for 2019? What
were its trends in net cash provided by operating activities over the period 2018 to 2019? Explain
why the increase in accounts payable and in accrued and other liabilities is added to net income to
arrive at net cash provided by operating activities.
d. Compute M&S’s: (1) current cash debt coverage, (2) cash debt coverage, and (3) free cash flow for
2019. What do these ratios indicate about M&S’s financial conditions?
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are presented in Appendices B and C,
respectively. The complete annual reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following questions.
a. What format(s) did these companies use to present their statements of financial position?
b. How much working capital did each of these companies have at the end of 2018? Speculate as to
their rationale for the amount of working capital they maintain.
c. What are some of the significant differences in the asset structure of the two companies? What
causes these differences?
d. What were these two companies’ trends in net cash provided by operating activities over the period
2017 to 2018?
e. Compute both companies’: (1) current cash debt coverage, (2) cash debt coverage, and (3) free cash
flow. What do these ratios indicate about the financial condition of the two companies?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1 Cathay Pacific Airlines
Cathay Pacific Airways (HKG) is an international airline offering scheduled passenger and cargo
services to 116 destinations in 35 countries and territories. The company was founded in Hong Kong in
1946 and remains deeply committed to its home base, making substantial investments to develop Hong
Kong as one of the world’s leading global transportation hubs. In addition to the fleet of 123 wide-
bodied aircraft, these investments include catering, aircraft maintenance, and ground-handling
companies. The following titles were shown on Cathay’s statement of financial position in a recent
year.
Current portion of long-term liabilities
Net non-current assets
Deferred taxation
Non-controlling interest
Fixed assets
Other long-term receivables and investments

--- Page 453 ---
Funds attributable to owners of Cathay Pacific Reserves Retirement benefit obligations
Intangible assets
Share capital—ordinary
Investments in associates
Taxation
Liquid funds
Trade and other payables
Long-term liabilities
Trade and other receivables
Unearned transportation revenue
Instructions
a. Organize the accounts in the general order in which they would be presented in a classified
statement of financial position.
b. When Cathay passengers purchase tickets for travel on future flights, what statement of financial
position accounts are most likely affected? Do the balances in these accounts decrease or increase?
Case 2 Christian Dior
Presented below is information reported by Christian Dior (FRA) related to its off-balance-sheet
commitments in its 2018 annual report. Christian Dior reported current assets of €29,585 and total
current liabilities of €17,363 at December 31, 2018. (All amounts are in millions of euros.)
Christian Dior
Note 30 (partial): Off-balance-sheet commitments
As of December 31, 2018, the maturity dates of these commitments break down as follows (euros in
millions):
Less than 1
Year
One to 5
Years
More than 5
Years
Total
Grapes, wines and eaux-de-vie
659
1,346
35 2,040
Other purchase commitments for raw materials
123
91
1
215
Industrial and commercial fixed assets
601
121
(1)
721
Investments in joint venture shares and
noncurrent financial assets
2,049
102
— 2,151
Total
3,432
1,660
35 5,127
Lease and similar commitments
In connection with its business activities, the Group enters into agreements for the rental of premises
or airport concession contracts. The Group also finances a portion of its equipment through long-term
operating leases.
The fixed or minimum portion of commitments in respect of the irrevocable period of operating lease
or concession contracts were as follows as of December 31, 2018 (euros in millions):
December 31, 2018
Less than 1 year
2,334
One to 5 years
6,098
More than 5 years
4,141
Commitments given for operating leases and concession fees
12,573
Instructions

--- Page 454 ---
a. Compute Christian Dior’s working capital and current ratio (current assets ÷ current liabilities)
with and without the off-balance-sheet items reported in Note 30.
b. Briefly discuss how the information provided in the off-balance-sheet note would be useful in
evaluating Christian Dior for loans (1) due in 1 year, and (2) due in 5 years.
Case 3 LG
The incredible growth of LG (KOR) has put fear into the hearts of competing appliance makers. The
following financial information is taken from LG’s financial statements.
(Korean won in billions)
Current Year Prior Year
Current assets
₩30,517
₩24,297
Total assets
64,782
54,080
Current liabilities
28,110
21,136
Total liabilities
39,048
32,152
Cash provided by operations
10,217
8,807
Capital expenditures
8,190
5,071
Dividends paid
659
423
Net income (loss)
2,967
3,632
Sales
90,222
76,228
Instructions
a. Calculate free cash flow for LG for the current and prior years, and discuss its ability to finance
expansion from internally generated cash. Assume that LG’s major capital expenditures are related
to building manufacturing plants and that, to date, it has avoided purchasing large warehouses.
Instead, it has used those of others. It is possible, however, that in order to continue its growth in
international sales, the company may have to build its own warehouses. If this happens, how
might your impression of its ability to finance expansion change?
b. Discuss any potential implications of the change in LG’s cash provided by operations from the
prior year to the current year.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Early in January 2023, Hopkins plc is preparing for a meeting with its bankers to discuss a loan
request. Its bookkeeper provided the following accounts and balances at December 31, 2022.
Debit
Credit
Inventory
£ 65,300
Accounts Receivable (net)
38,500
Cash
75,000
Equipment (net)
84,000
Patents
15,000
Notes and Accounts Payable
£ 52,000
Notes Payable (due 2024)
75,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
100,000
Retained Earnings
        
50,800
£277,800
£277,800
Except for the following items, Hopkins has recorded all adjustments in its accounts.

--- Page 455 ---
1. Net accounts receivable is comprised of £52,000 in accounts receivable and £13,500 in allowance
for doubtful accounts.
2. Cash includes £500 petty cash and £15,000 in a bond sinking fund.
3. Equipment had a cost of £112,000 and accumulated depreciation of £28,000.
4. On January 8, 2023, one of Hopkins’ customers declared bankruptcy. At December 31, 2022, this
customer owed Hopkins £9,000.
Accounting
Prepare a corrected December 31, 2022, statement of financial position for Hopkins plc.
Analysis
Hopkins’ bank is considering granting an additional loan in the amount of £45,000, which will be due
December 31, 2023. How can the information in the statement of financial position provide useful
information to the bank about Hopkins’ ability to repay the loan?
Principles
In the upcoming meeting with the bank, Hopkins plans to provide additional information about the fair
value of its equipment and some internally generated intangible assets related to its customer lists.
This information indicates that Hopkins has significant unrealized gains on these assets, which are not
reflected on the statement of financial position. What objections is the bank likely to raise about the
usefulness of this information in evaluating Hopkins for the loan renewal?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2005), par. BC 16.
[2] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2005), par. 60.
[3] International Financial Reporting Standard 9, Financial Instruments (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Board Foundation, 2014), Chapter 5, Measurement.
[4] International Accounting Standard 32, Financial Instruments: Presentation (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, December 2003), par. 11.
[5] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2005), par. 69.
[6] International Financial Reporting Standard 9, Financial Instruments (London, U.K.: International
Accounting Standards Board Foundation, 2014), Chapter 5, Measurement, paras. 4.1.5 and 4.2.2.
[7] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, September 2005), par. 72.
[8] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, September 2005), par. 10d.
[9] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, September 2005), par. 10.
[10] International Accounting Standard 1, Presentation of Financial Statements (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, December 2005).
[11] International Accounting Standard 8, Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and
Errors (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2003).

--- Page 456 ---
Research Case
In light of the full disclosure principle, investors and creditors need to know the balances for assets,
liabilities, and equity, as well as the accounting policies adopted by management to measure the items
reported in the statement of financial position.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register for free IFRS access at
the site). When you have accessed the documents, you can use the search tool in your Internet browser
to respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the literature that addresses the disclosure of accounting policies.
b. How are accounting policies defined in the literature?
c. What are the guidelines concerning consistency in applying accounting policies?
d. What are some examples of common disclosures that are required under this statement?
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the statement of financial position and statement of cash flows under IFRS and U.S.
GAAP.
As in IFRS, the statement of financial position and the statement of cash flows are required statements
for U.S. GAAP. In addition, the content and presentation of a U.S. GAAP statement of financial position
and cash flow statement are similar to those used for IFRS.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to the
statement of financial position.
Similarities
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow the use of the title “balance sheet” or “statement of financial
position.” IFRS recommends but does not require the use of the title “statement of financial
position” rather than balance sheet.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require disclosures about (1) accounting policies followed, (2)
judgments that management has made in the process of applying the entity’s accounting policies,
and (3) the key assumptions and estimation uncertainty that could result in a material adjustment
to the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year. Comparative prior
period information must be presented and financial statements must be prepared annually.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS require presentation of non-controlling interests in the equity section of the
statement of financial position.
Differences
U.S. GAAP follows the same guidelines as presented in the chapter for distinguishing between
current and non-current assets and liabilities. However, under U.S. GAAP, public companies must
follow U.S. SEC regulations, which require specific line items. In addition, specific U.S. GAAP
mandates certain forms of reporting for this information. IFRS requires a classified statement of
financial position except in very limited situations.

--- Page 457 ---
Under U.S. GAAP cash is listed first, but under IFRS it is many times listed last. That is, under
IFRS, current assets are usually listed in the reverse order of liquidity than they are under U.S.
GAAP.
U.S. GAAP has many differences in terminology that you will notice in this text. One example is
the use of common stock under U.S. GAAP, which is referred to as share capital—ordinary under
IFRS.
Use of the term “reserve” is discouraged in U.S. GAAP, but there is no such prohibition in IFRS.
About the Numbers
The order of presentation in the statement of financial position differs between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
As indicated in Illustration GAAP5.1, U.S. companies generally present current assets, non-current
assets, current and non-current liabilities, and shareholders’ equity.
Assets
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
Current assets
Current liabilities
Long-term investments
Long-term debt
Property, plant, and equipment Shareholders’ equity
Intangible assets
Common stock
Other assets
Additional paid-in capital
Retained earnings
ILLUSTRATION GAAP5.1 Statement of Financial Position for U.S. Companies
In addition, within the current asset and liability classifications, items are presented in order of
liquidity, as indicated in the following excerpt from Hasbro, Inc. (USA).
Hasbro, Inc.
(in thousands)
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$ 715,400
Accounts receivable, less allowances of $27,700
556,287
Inventories
203,337
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
243,291
Total current assets
$1,718,315
On the Horizon
At one time, the IASB and the FASB worked on a project to converge their standards related to financial
statement presentation, including the statement of financial position (balance sheet). A key feature of
the revised framework is that each of the statements will be organized, in the same format, to separate
an entity’s financing activities from its operating and investing activities, and, further, to separate
financing activities into transactions with owners and creditors. Thus, the same classifications used in
the statement of financial position could be used in the statement of comprehensive income and the
statement of cash flows.
That original convergence project is on hold, but both Boards have pivoted to focus on performance
reporting (the income statement). Why abandon a project on the statement of financial position? Well,
both Boards learned in their research that there is good comparability in the structure and content of
the statement of financial position. While companies may not be presenting sufficient detail in the
statement or note disclosures, current reporting requirements could be “tweaked” to meet IFRS or

--- Page 458 ---
FASB objectives for the statement of financial position (balance sheet) instead of undergoing a major
overhaul.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following statements about IFRS and U.S. GAAP accounting and reporting
requirements for the balance sheet is not correct?
a. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP distinguish between current and non-current assets and liabilities.
b. The presentation formats required by IFRS and U.S. GAAP for the balance sheet are similar.
c. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP require that comparative information be reported.
d. One difference between the reporting requirements under IFRS and those of the U.S. GAAP
balance sheet is that an IFRS balance sheet may list non-current assets first.
2. Current assets under IFRS are listed generally:
a. by importance.
b. in the reverse order of their expected conversion to cash.
c. by longevity.
d. alphabetically.
3. Companies that use IFRS:
a. may report all their assets on the statement of financial position at fair value.
b. are not allowed to net assets (assets − liabilities) on their statement of financial positions.
c. may report non-current assets before current assets on the statement of financial position.
d. do not have any guidelines as to what should be reported on the statement of financial position.
4. Franco Company uses IFRS and reports a “reserve” in its statement of financial position. If Franco
were reporting under U.S. GAAP, it would:
a. be required to report a reserve in its balance sheet.
b. be discouraged from using the term “reserve” in its financial statements.
c. have the option to use the term “reserves.”
d. report the reserve in the liability section of its balance sheet.
5. Which of the following is not a required disclosure under IFRS and U.S. GAAP?
a. Accounting policies followed.
b. Judgments that management has made in the process of applying the entity’s accounting policies.
c. Key assumptions and estimation uncertainty that could result in a material adjustment to the
carrying amounts of assets and liabilities within the next financial year.
d. Number of employees.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP5.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP with
respect to statement of financial position reporting.
GAAP5.2 Briefly describe the convergence efforts related to financial statement presentation.

--- Page 459 ---
GAAP5.3 Rainmaker Company prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Briefly
discuss the differences in order of presentation in its statement of financial position compared to IFRS.
GAAP5.4 The following is the balance sheet (statement of financial position) for Nordstrom, Inc.
(USA).
Nordstrom, Inc.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
In millions
Assets
Current
Year
Prior
Year
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents
$ 595
$ 827
Accounts receivable, net
196
2,306
Merchandise inventories
1,945
1,733
Current deferred tax assets, net
—
256
Prepaid expenses and other
278
102
Total current assets
3,014
5,224
Land, property and equipment, net
3,735
3,340
Goodwill
435
435
Other assets
514
246
Total Assets
$7,698
$9,245
Liabilities and Shareholder’s Equity
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
$1,324
$1,328
Accrued salaries, wages and related benefits
416
416
Other current liabilities
1,161
1,048
Current portion of long-term debt
10
8
Total current liabilities
2,911
2,800
Long-term debt, net
2,795
3,123
Deferred property incentives, net
540
510
Other liabilities
581
372
Commitments and contingencies (Note 12)
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, no par value: 1,000 shares authorized; 173.5 and 190.1 shares
issued and outstanding
2,539
2,338
(Accumulated deficit) Retained earnings
(1,610)
166
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(58)
(64)
Total shareholders’ equity
871
2,440
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity
$7,698
$9,245
Instructions
a. Identify at least three differences in statement of financial position reporting between IFRS and
U.S. GAAP, as shown in Nordstrom’s balance sheet.

--- Page 460 ---
b. Review Nordstrom’s balance sheet and identify how the format of this financial statement
provides useful information, as illustrated in the chapter.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. b 2. b 3. c 4. b 5. d
Notes
1 The IASB indicates that the title “statement of financial position” better reflects the function of the
statement and is consistent with the Conceptual Framework discussed in Chapter 2. The title
“balance sheet” simply reflects the condition that double-entry bookkeeping requires all debits to
equal all credits and does not identify the content or purpose of the statement. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.)
2 Risk conveys the unpredictability of future events, transactions, circumstances, and results of the
company.
3 A company may classify the statement of financial position in some other manner, but in practice you
see little departure from these major subdivisions. In some countries, such as Germany, companies
often list current assets first. IAS No. 1 requires companies to distinguish current assets and
liabilities from non-current ones, except in limited situations. [2]
4 Note that the IASB issued IFRS 9, Financial Instruments, which eliminated the available-for-sale and
held-to-maturity classifications.
5 A financial instrument is any contract that gives rise to a financial asset for one company and a
financial liability or equity instrument for another company. [4]
6 More specifically, IFRS indicates that “an entity shall classify an asset as current when: (a) it expects
to realise the asset, or intends to sell or consume it, in its normal operating cycle; (b) it holds the
asset primarily for the purpose of trading; (c) it expects to realise the asset within twelve months
after the reporting period; or (d) the asset is cash or a cash equivalent (as defined in IAS 7) unless
the asset is restricted from being exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least twelve months
after the reporting period. An entity shall classify all other assets as non-current.” [5]
7 Under the fair value option, companies may elect to use fair value as the measurement basis for
selected financial assets and liabilities. For these companies, some of their financial assets (and
liabilities) may be recorded at historical cost, while others are recorded at fair value. [6]
8 Cash is generally meant to be “cash and cash equivalents.” Cash equivalents are liquid investments
that mature within three months or less.
9 Companies are required either in the statement of cash flows or in the related notes to report the
amounts paid for interest and income taxes. We assume here that the company is presenting this
information in the notes to the financial statements. Therefore, for homework purposes, you need
not present this information in the statement. In Chapter 23, we will explore this issue in more
detail.
10 One highly publicized exception is the case of Société Générale (SocGen) (FRA). The bank used
the true and fair rule to justify reporting losses that occurred in 2008 in the prior year. Although
allowed under the true and fair rule, such reporting was questioned because it permitted the bank to
“take a bath,” that is, record as many losses as possible in 2007, which was already a bad year for the
bank. As a result, SocGen’s 2008 reports looked better. See F. Norris, “SocGen Changes Its
Numbers,” The New York Times (May 13, 2008).
Sources: Preliminary Views on Financial Statement Presentation, FASB/IASB Discussion Paper (October 2008); N. Trentmann,
“IASB Plans Overhaul of Financial Definitions,” Wall Street Journal (November 2, 2016); Primary Financial Statements: Analysis of
Financial Statements Presentation, IASB Staff Paper (November 2016); J. Kuepper, “Spotting Creative Accounting on the Balance

--- Page 461 ---
Sheet,” www.investopedia.com (Dec 12, 2017); and Q. Chen, K. Schipper, and N. Zhang, “A Balance-Sheet-Based Measure of
Accounting Quality,” Duke Working Paper (September 30, 2019).

--- Page 462 ---
