CHAPTER 12
Intangible Assets
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Discuss the characteristics, valuation, and amortization of
intangible assets.
2. Describe the accounting for various types of intangible assets.
3. Explain the accounting issues for recording goodwill.
4. Identify impairment procedures and presentation
requirements for intangible assets.
5. Describe the accounting and presentation for research and
development and similar costs.

--- Page 942 ---
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual
discussions that are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 12
As the following opening story indicates, sustainability strategies
are taking on increased importance for companies like SAP (DEU)
and Alcatel Lucent Enterprise (FRA). Reporting challenges for
effective sustainability investments are similar to those for
intangible assets. In this chapter, we explain the basic conceptual
and reporting issues related to intangible assets. The content and
organization of the chapter are as follows.
Is This Sustainable?
Companies are increasing their focus on sustainability issues.
Companies like Alcatel Lucent Enterprise (FRA), China
Southern Power Grid Co. (CHN), and Clorox (USA) are
implementing strategic initiatives such as fuel-spill control, use of
recycled materials, and water conservation in efforts to support long-
term objectives related to responsible management of resource use.
Why the growing importance of sustainability? One important reason
is that market participants are increasingly looking to invest in
companies that are pursuing sustainability strategies.

--- Page 943 ---
For example, as indicated in the adjacent graph, global sustainability
investments have increased from below $10 trillion in 2006 to over
$70 trillion in 2017.
In response, companies are now providing more useful “non-
financial” information about the future cash flow consequences of
sustainability strategies. Many companies are exploring ways to
combine this non-financial information with mandated disclosures in
what is called an integrated report. In such a report, a company
discloses data on numerous metrics beyond conventional financial
statements, whether the data are “integrated” or released in a separate
format. Practitioners collectively refer to sustainability reporting as
ESG, for the three major categories of data: environmental, social, and
company governance.
While a growing number of companies are issuing sustainability
reports, there is significant variation in the content and format. Only a
handful, like those prepared by Clorox (USA), SAP (DEU), and
Polymer Group Inc. (USA), integrate a sustainability report with
the financial statements. Standards to ensure useful information on
ESG issues are being developed by the International Integrated
Reporting Council and the Sustainability Accounting
Standards Board. And with the emergence of sustainability and
integrated reporting standards, companies are voluntarily seeking
assurance that their sustainability reports are meeting these
standards. For example, over half of the world’s largest companies

--- Page 944 ---
recently reporting on sustainability also invested in external
assurance for their reports. With standards and assurance, it is hoped
that sustainability reports will gain the same credibility as the
financial statements.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter
for a targeted summary review and practice problem with solution.
Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as
additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also
available online.
Intangible Asset Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Discuss the characteristics, valuation, and amortization of
intangible assets.
Characteristics
Christian Dior’s (FRA) most important asset is its brand image, not
its store fixtures. The Coca-Cola Company’s (USA) success comes
from its secret formula for making Coca-Cola, not its plant facilities.
The world economy is dominated by information and service
providers. For these companies, their major assets are often intangible
in nature.
What exactly are intangible assets? Intangible assets have three
main characteristics. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References
section near the end of the chapter.)
1. They are identifiable. To be identifiable, an intangible asset
must either be separable from the company (can be sold or
transferred), or it arises from a contractual or legal right from
which economic benefits will flow to the company.

--- Page 945 ---
2. They lack physical existence. Tangible assets such as
property, plant, and equipment have physical form. Intangible
assets, in contrast, derive their value from the rights and
privileges granted to the company using them.
3. They are not monetary assets. Assets such as bank deposits,
accounts receivable, and long-term investments in bonds and
shares also lack physical substance. However, monetary assets
derive their value from the right (claim) to receive cash or cash
equivalents in the future. Monetary assets are not classified as
intangibles.
In most cases, intangible assets provide benefits over a period of
years. Therefore, companies normally classify them as non-current
assets.
Valuation
Purchased Intangibles
Companies record at cost intangibles purchased from another party.
Cost includes all acquisition costs plus expenditures to make the
intangible asset ready for its intended use. Typical costs include
purchase price, legal fees, and other incidental expenses.
Sometimes companies acquire intangibles in exchange for shares or
other assets. In such cases, the cost of the intangible is the fair
value of the consideration given or the fair value of the
intangible received, whichever is more clearly evident. What if
a company buys several intangibles, or a combination of intangibles
and tangibles? In such a “basket purchase,” the company should
allocate the cost on the basis of relative fair values. Essentially, the
accounting treatment for purchased intangibles closely parallels that
for purchased tangible assets.1
Internally Created Intangibles
Businesses frequently incur costs on a variety of intangible resources,
such as scientific or technological knowledge, market research,

--- Page 946 ---
intellectual property, and brand names. These costs are commonly
referred to as research and development (R&D) costs. Intangible
assets that might arise from these expenditures include patents,
computer software, copyrights, and trademarks. For example, Nokia
(FIN) incurred R&D costs to develop its communications equipment,
resulting in patents related to its technology. In determining the
accounting for these costs, Nokia must determine whether its R&D
project is at a sufficiently advanced stage to be considered
economically viable. To perform this assessment, Nokia evaluates
costs incurred during the research phase and the development
phase.
Illustration 12.1 indicates the two stages of research and
development activities, along with the accounting treatment for costs
incurred during these phases.
ILLUSTRATION 12.1 Research and Development Stages
As indicated, all costs incurred in the research phase are expensed as
incurred. Once a project moves to the development phase, certain
development costs are capitalized. Specifically, development costs are
capitalized when certain criteria are met, indicating that an
economically viable intangible asset will result from the R&D project.
In essence, economic viability indicates that the project is far
enough along in the process such that the economic benefits of the
R&D project will flow to the company. Therefore, development costs
incurred from that point forward meet the recognition criteria and
should be recorded as an intangible asset (see Underlying
Concepts).

--- Page 947 ---
Underlying Concepts
The controversy surrounding the accounting for R&D expenditures
reflects a debate about whether such expenditures meet the
definition of an asset. If so, then an “expense all research and
some development costs” policy results in overstated expenses and
understated assets.
In summary, companies expense all research phase costs and
some development phase costs. Certain development costs
are capitalized once economic viability criteria are met. IFRS
identifies several specific criteria that must be met before
development costs are capitalized (which we discuss in more detail
later in the chapter).2
Amortization of Intangibles
The allocation of the cost of intangible assets in a systematic way is
called amortization. Intangibles have either a limited (finite)
useful life or an indefinite useful life. For example, a company
like Disney (USA) has both types of intangibles. Disney amortizes
its limited-life intangible assets (e.g., copyrights on its movies and
licenses related to its branded products). It does not amortize
indefinite-life intangible assets (e.g., the Disney trade name or its
Internet domain name).
Limited-Life Intangibles
Companies amortize their limited-life intangibles by systematic
charges to expense over their useful life. The useful life should reflect
the periods over which these assets will contribute to cash flows.
Disney, for example, considers these factors in determining useful
lives:
1. The expected use of the asset by the company.
2. The effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, and other
economic factors. Examples include the stability of the industry,

--- Page 948 ---
known technological advances, legislative action that results in an
uncertain or changing regulatory environment, and expected
changes in distribution channels.
3. Any provisions (legal, regulatory, or contractual) that enable
renewal or extension of the asset’s legal or contractual life
without substantial cost. This factor assumes that there is
evidence to support renewal or extension. Disney also must be
able to accomplish renewal or extension without material
modifications of the existing terms and conditions.
4. The level of maintenance expenditure required to obtain the
expected future cash flows from the asset. For example, a
material level of required maintenance in relation to the carrying
amount of the asset may suggest a very limited useful life.
5. Any legal, regulatory, or contractual provisions that may limit the
useful life.
6. The expected useful life of another asset or a group of assets to
which the useful life of the intangible asset may relate (such as
lease rights to a studio lot). [3]
The amount of amortization expense for a limited-life intangible asset
should reflect the pattern in which the company consumes or uses up
the asset, if the company can reliably determine that pattern. For
example, assume that Second Wave Ltd. purchases a license to
provide a specified quantity of a gene product called Mega. Second
Wave should amortize the cost of the license following the pattern of
use of Mega. If Second Wave’s license calls for it to provide 30 percent
of the total the first year, 20 percent the second year, and 10 percent
per year until the license expires, it would amortize the license cost
using that pattern. If it cannot determine the pattern of production or
consumption, Second Wave should use the straight-line method of
amortization. (For homework problems, assume the use of the
straight-line method unless stated otherwise.) When Second Wave
amortizes this license, it should show the charges as
expenses. It should credit either the appropriate asset
accounts or separate accumulated amortization accounts.

--- Page 949 ---
The amount of an intangible asset to be amortized should be its cost
less residual value. The residual value is assumed to be zero, unless at
the end of its useful life the intangible asset has value to another
company. For example, if Hardy Co. purchases an intangible asset
from U2D Co., U2D Co. should reduce the cost of its intangible asset
by the residual value (when computing amortization). Similarly, U2D
Co. should consider fair values, if reliably determinable, for the
residual.
IFRS requires companies to assess the estimated residual values and
useful lives of intangible assets at least annually. What happens if the
life of a limited-life intangible asset changes? In that case, the
remaining carrying amount should be amortized over the revised
remaining useful life (see Underlying Concepts). Companies must
also evaluate the limited-life intangibles annually to determine if
there is an indication of impairment. If there is indication of
impairment, an impairment test is performed.
Underlying Concepts
The terms “carrying amount,” “carrying value,” and “book value”
are all used to refer to the cost less accumulated amortization of
an intangible asset.
An impairment loss should be recognized for the amount that the
carrying amount of the intangible is greater than the recoverable
amount. Recall that the recoverable amount is the greater of the fair
value less costs to sell or value-in-use. (We will cover impairment of
intangibles in more detail later in the chapter.)
Indefinite-Life Intangibles
If no factors (legal, regulatory, contractual, competitive, or other)
limit the useful life of an intangible asset, a company considers its
useful life indefinite. An indefinite life means that there is no
foreseeable limit on the period of time over which the intangible asset
is expected to provide cash flows. A company does not amortize an
intangible asset with an indefinite life. To illustrate, assume that

--- Page 950 ---
Double Clik Group acquired a trademark that it uses to distinguish a
leading consumer product. It renews the trademark every 10 years. All
evidence indicates that this trademark product will generate cash
flows for an indefinite period of time. In this case, the trademark has
an indefinite life; Double Clik does not record any amortization.
Companies also must test indefinite-life intangibles for impairment
at least annually. The impairment test for indefinite-life intangibles
is similar to the one for limited-life intangibles. That is, an
impairment loss should be recognized for the amount that the
carrying amount of the indefinite-life intangible asset is greater than
the recoverable amount.3
Illustration 12.2 summarizes the accounting treatment for
intangible assets.4
Manner Acquired
Type of
Intangible Purchased
Internally
Created
Amortization
Impairment
Test
Limited-
life
intangibles
Capitalize Expense*
Over useful
life
Compare
recoverable
amount to
carrying
value.
Indefinite-
life
intangibles
Capitalize Expense*
Do not
amortize
Compare
recoverable
amount to
carrying
value.
*Except for certain limited
costs that meet recognition
criteria.
ILLUSTRATION 
12.2 
Accounting 
Treatment 
for
Intangibles

--- Page 951 ---
Types of Intangible Assets
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Describe the accounting for various types of intangible assets.
There are many different types of intangibles, often classified into the
following six major categories. [5]
1. Marketing-related intangible assets.
2. Customer-related intangible assets.
3. Artistic-related intangible assets.
4. Contract-related intangible assets.
5. Technology-related intangible assets.
6. Goodwill.
Marketing-Related Intangible Assets
Companies primarily use marketing-related intangible assets in
the marketing or promotion of their products or services. Examples
are trademarks or trade names, newspaper mastheads, Internet
domain names, and non-competition agreements.
A trademark or trade name is a word, phrase, or symbol that
distinguishes or identifies a particular company or product. Trade
names like Mercedes-Benz, Pepsi-Cola, Honda, Cadbury Eggs,
Wheaties, and Ikea create immediate product identification in our
minds, thereby enhancing marketability. A recent expansion of
Internet domain names will allow industries to use terms like .cars or
even Web slang like .lol. This expansion has led to a new wave of
domain-name activity. For a substantial fee, companies can register
their own domain names; applications received include company
names such as Sony (JPN) (which would have the name .sony) and
for city-based domains such as .NYC and .Berlin.

--- Page 952 ---
Under common law, the right to use a trademark or trade name,
whether registered or not, rests exclusively with the original user as
long as the original user continues to use it. For example, in the
United States, registration with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
provides legal protection for an indefinite number of renewals for
periods of 10 years each.5 Therefore, a company that uses an
established trademark or trade name may properly consider it to have
an indefinite life and does not amortize its cost.
If a company buys a trademark or trade name, it capitalizes the cost at
the purchase price. If a company develops a trademark or trade name,
it capitalizes costs related to securing it, such as attorney fees,
registration fees, design costs, and consulting fees. However, it
excludes research costs and development costs that do not meet
recognition criteria. When the total cost of a trademark or trade name
is insignificant, a company simply expenses it.
It is not uncommon for companies to incur legal fees and other costs
to protect their valuable trade names and other intangible assets (e.g.,
copyrights and patents, discussed in the next two sections) (see
“Patent Battles” in the “What Do the Numbers Mean?” box). In
general, IFRS does not allow capitalization of these subsequent
expenditures. The reason? The IASB indicates that subsequent
expenditures likely only maintain the expected future economic
benefits of the existing intangible asset, rather than enhancing its
value or creating a new intangible asset. [6]
Customer-Related Intangible Assets
Customer-related intangible assets result from interactions with
outside parties. Examples include customer lists, order or production
backlogs, and both contractual and non-contractual customer
relationships.
To illustrate, assume that Green Market AG acquires the customer list
of a large newspaper for €6,000,000 on January 1, 2022. This
customer database includes names, contact details, order history, and
demographic information. Green Market expects to benefit from the
information evenly over a three-year period. In this case, the customer

--- Page 953 ---
list is a limited-life intangible that Green Market should amortize on a
straight-line basis.
Green Market records the purchase of the customer list and the
amortization of the customer list at the end of each year as follows.
The preceding example assumed no residual value for the customer
list. But what if Green Market determines that it can sell the list for
€60,000 to another company at the end of three years? In that case,
Green Market should subtract this residual value from the cost in
order to determine the amortization expense for each year.
Amortization expense would be €1,980,000 per year, as shown in
Illustration 12.3.
Cost
€6,000,000
Residual value
(60,000)
Amortization base
€5,940,000
Amortization expense per period: €1,980,000
(€5,940,000 ÷ 3)
ILLUSTRATION 12.3 Calculation of Amortization Expense
with Residual Value
Companies should assume a zero residual value unless the asset’s
useful life is less than the economic life and reliable evidence is
available concerning the residual value. [7]
Artistic-Related Intangible Assets
Artistic-related intangible assets involve ownership rights to
plays, literary works, musical works, pictures, photographs, and video

--- Page 954 ---
and audiovisual material. Copyrights protect these ownership rights.
A copyright is a government-granted right that all authors, painters,
musicians, sculptors, and other artists have in their creations and
expressions. A copyright is granted for the life of the creator plus
70 years.6 It gives the owner or heirs the exclusive right to reproduce
and sell an artistic or published work. Copyrights are not renewable.
Copyrights can be valuable. In the late 1990s, Disney (USA) faced the
loss of its copyright on Mickey Mouse, which could have affected sales
of billions of dollars of Mickey-related goods and services (including
theme parks). This copyright was so important that Disney and many
other big entertainment companies fought all the way to the U.S.
Supreme Court—and won an extension of copyright lives from 50 to
70 years.
As another example, Really Useful Group (USA) owns copyrights
on the musicals of Andrew Lloyd Webber—Cats, Phantom of the
Opera, Jesus Christ Superstar, and others. Really Useful Group has
little in the way of tangible assets, yet analysts value the company at
over $300 million.
Companies capitalize the costs of acquiring a copyright. They amortize
any capitalized costs over the useful life of the copyright if less than
its legal life (life of the creator plus 70 years). For example, Really
Useful Group should allocate the costs of its copyrights to the years in
which it expects to receive the benefits. The difficulty of determining
the number of years over which it will receive benefits typically
encourages a company like Really Useful Group to write off these
costs over a fairly short period of time. Companies must expense all
research costs and any development costs not meeting recognition
criteria that lead to a copyright as those costs are incurred.
Contract-Related Intangible Assets
Contract-related intangible assets represent the value of rights
that arise from contractual arrangements. Examples are franchise and
licensing agreements, construction permits, broadcast rights, and
service or supply contracts.

--- Page 955 ---
A franchise is a contractual arrangement under which the franchisor
grants the franchisee the right to sell certain products or services, to
use certain trademarks or trade names, or to perform certain
functions, usually within a designated geographical area. When you
purchase a Prius from a Toyota (JPN) dealer, fill up your tank at the
corner Shell (NLD) station, or eat lunch at a McDonald’s (USA)
restaurant, you are most likely dealing with franchises.
The franchisor, having developed a unique concept or product,
protects its concept or product through a patent, copyright, or
trademark or trade name. The franchisee acquires the right to exploit
the franchisor’s idea or product by signing a franchise agreement.
Another type of franchise arrangement, granted by a governmental
body, permits a business to use public property in performing its
services. Examples are the use of city streets for a bus line or taxi
service; the use of public land for telephone, electric, or cable
television lines; and the use of airwaves for radio or TV broadcasting.
Such operating rights are referred to as licenses or permits.
Franchises and licenses may be for a definite period of time, for an
indefinite period of time, or perpetual. The company securing the
franchise or license carries an intangible asset account (entitled
Franchises or Licenses) on its books, only when it can identify costs
with the acquisition of the operating right. (Such costs might be legal
fees or an advance lump-sum payment, for example.) A company
should amortize the cost of a franchise (or license) with a
limited life as operating expense over the life of the franchise.
It should not amortize a franchise with an indefinite life nor a
perpetual franchise; the company should instead carry such franchises
at cost.
Annual payments made under a franchise agreement should be
entered as operating expenses in the period in which they are
incurred. These payments do not represent an asset since they do not
relate to future rights to use the property.
Technology-Related Intangible Assets

--- Page 956 ---
Technology-related intangible assets relate to innovations or
technological advances. Examples are patented technology and trade
secrets granted by a governmental body.
In many countries, a patent gives the holder exclusive right to use,
manufacture, and sell a product or process for a period of 20 years
without interference or infringement by others.7 Companies such as
Merck (USA) and Canon (JPN) were founded on patents and built
on the exclusive rights thus granted.8 The two principal kinds of
patents are product patents, which cover actual physical products,
and process patents, which govern the process of making products.
If a company like Samsung (KOR) purchases a patent from an
inventor, the purchase price represents its cost. Samsung can
capitalize other costs incurred in connection with securing a patent,
such as registration and attorneys’ fees. However, it must expense
all research costs and any development costs incurred before
achieving economic viability related to the development of the
product, process, or idea that it subsequently patents.
Companies should amortize the cost of a patent over its legal life or its
useful life (the period in which benefits are received), whichever is
shorter. If Samsung owns a patent from the date it is granted and
expects the patent to be useful during its entire legal life, the company
should amortize it over 20 years. If it appears that the patent will be
useful for a shorter period of time, say, for five years, it should
amortize its cost over five years.
Changing demand, new inventions superseding old ones, inadequacy,
and other factors often limit the useful life of a patent to less than the
legal life. For example, the useful life of pharmaceutical patents is
frequently less than the legal life because of the testing and approval
period that follows their issuance. A typical drug patent has several
years knocked off its 20-year legal life. Why? Because, in the United
States, a drugmaker spends one to four years on animal tests, four to
six years on human tests, and two to three years for the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration to review the tests. All this time occurs after
issuing the patent but before the product goes on pharmacists’
shelves.

--- Page 957 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Patent Battles
The smartphone industry has been a patent battleground. For
example, Nokia (FIN) filed patent lawsuits against Apple (USA),
and Apple countersued, over such cell phone features as swiping
gestures on touch screens and the “app store” for downloading
software. Apple also targeted HTC (TWN) for infringing on
Apple’s patented feature that allows screens to detect more than
one finger touch at a time. This facilitates the popular zoom-in and
zoom-out capability. HTC, in turn, sued Apple for infringing on
patented technology that helps extend battery life.
With respect to popular apps used on smartphones, BlackBerry
(CAN) sued Facebook (USA), alleging that the Facebook apps
WhatsApp and Instagram co-opted BlackBerry’s intellectual
property. This property includes the very features that users
demand in these apps, explaining why BlackBerry would go to
these legal lengths to protect its patents.
The activity-tracker product space is another patent battleground.
Competition in that market heated up when Under Armour
(USA) paid $150 million to acquire MapMyFitness (USA), which
had 20 million people registered to use its websites and mobile
applications to map, record, and share their workouts. To protect
the value of the patent related to its miCoach (USA) fitness
tracking system, adidas AG (DEU) sued Under Armour to protect
its 10 patents, underscoring the growing importance of gadgetry
and personal technology for sportswear makers that traditionally
focused on shoes and apparel.
Sources: J. Mintz, “Smart Phone Makers in Legal Fights over Patents,” Wisconsin
State Journal (December 19, 2010), p. F4; S. Germano, “adidas Sues Under Armour
Over Patents: Company Alleges Under Armour Infringes on 10 miCoach Patents,” Wall
Street Journal (February 4, 2014); and D. George-Cosh, “BlackBerry Brings Patent
Case Against Facebook, WhatsApp and Instagram,” Wall Street Journal (March 6,
2018).

--- Page 958 ---
Amortization expense should reflect the pattern, if reliably
determined, in which a company uses up the patent.9 A company may
credit amortization of patents directly to the Patents account or to an
Accumulated Patent Amortization account. To illustrate, assume that
Harcott Co. incurs $180,000 in legal costs on January 1, 2022, to
secure a patent. The patent’s useful life is 10 years, amortized on a
straight-line basis. Harcott records the legal fees and the amortization
at the end of 2022 as follows.
We’ve indicated that a patent’s useful life should not extend beyond
its legal life of 20 years. However, companies often make small
modifications or additions that lead to a new patent. For example,
AstraZeneca plc (GBR) filed for additional patents on minor
modifications to its heartburn drug, Prilosec. The effect may be to
extend the life of the old patent. If the new patent provides essentially
the same benefits, AstraZeneca can apply the unamortized costs of the
old patent to the new patent.
Alternatively, if a patent becomes impaired because demand drops for
the product, the asset should be written down or written off
immediately to expense.

--- Page 959 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Patents—Strategic Lifeblood
Are patents valuable assets, even though they are intangible? Let’s
take a look at BASF (DEU), a leading international chemical
company. Here is the BASF strategy statement regarding
innovation:
“Innovations based on effective and efficient research and
development are an important growth engine for BASF…. This is
how we ensure our long-term business success with chemistry-
based solutions for almost all sectors of industry.”
And BASF acts on this strategy through expenditures on research
and development, which many times lead to valuable patents. For
example in a recent year, BASF spent €1,426 million on research
and development (that’s 30 percent of net income), and product
innovation alone (from products on the market since 2013)
generated €9 billion in sales. In that year alone, BASF filed 900
new patents worldwide.
Because patented technology is so important to BASF’s success, it
is not surprising that it provides expansive disclosure of patent-
related information in its financial statements. Adjacent is an
excerpt, from the note disclosure.
This development schedule for know-how intangible assets
(sometimes referred to as a “roll-forward”) provides reconciliation
of the changes in the intangible asset account. This information is
important for understanding the magnitude of this important
intangible asset and how it changed during the period. Note that
BASF’s total intangible assets decreased during the year and that
there was a net decrease in its patent balance. This would be
something to watch, given the importance of patented innovations
in the BASF strategy.
Assets
2018
2017
Intangible assets
€16,554
€17,755

--- Page 960 ---
(000,000)
11—INTANGIBLE ASSETS (in part)
Acquisition costs
Know-how, patents and production
technology
Balance as of January 1,
2018
€1,879
Additions, net
2,761
Disposals/Transfers
(117)
Exchange differences,
other
52
Balance as of December
31, 2018
4,575
Accumulated amortization
(1,046)
Net carrying value
€3,529
Goodwill
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting issues for recording goodwill.
Although companies may capitalize certain costs incurred in
developing specifically identifiable assets such as patents and
copyrights, the amounts capitalized are generally insignificant. But
companies do record material amounts of intangible assets when
purchasing intangible assets, particularly in situations involving a
business combination (the purchase of another business).
To illustrate, assume that Portofino Company decides to purchase
Aquinas Company. In this situation, Portofino measures the assets
acquired and the liabilities assumed at fair value. In measuring these
assets and liabilities, Portofino must identify all the assets and
liabilities of Aquinas. As a result, Portofino may recognize some assets

--- Page 961 ---
or liabilities not previously recognized by Aquinas. For example,
Portofino may recognize intangible assets such as a brand name,
patent, or customer list that were not recorded by Aquinas. In this
case, Aquinas may not have recognized these assets because they were
developed internally and charged to expense.10
In many business combinations, the purchasing company records
goodwill. Goodwill is measured as the excess of the cost of the
purchase over the fair value of the identifiable net assets (assets less
liabilities) purchased. For example, if Portofino paid $2,000,000 to
purchase Aquinas’s identifiable net assets (with a fair value of
$1,500,000), Portofino records goodwill of $500,000. Goodwill is
therefore measured as a residual rather than measured directly. That
is why goodwill is sometimes referred to as a plug, a gap filler, or a
master valuation account.
Conceptually, goodwill represents the future economic benefits
arising from the other assets acquired in a business combination that
are not individually identified and separately recognized. It is often
called “the most intangible of the intangible assets” because it is
identified only with the business as a whole. The only way to sell
goodwill is to sell the business.
Recording Goodwill
Internally Created Goodwill
Goodwill generated internally should not be capitalized in
the accounts. The reason? Measuring the components of goodwill is
simply too complex, and associating any costs with future benefits is
too difficult. The future benefits of goodwill may have no relationship
to the costs incurred in the development of that goodwill. To add to
the mystery, goodwill may even exist in the absence of specific costs
to develop it. Finally, because no objective transaction with outside
parties takes place, a great deal of subjectivity—even
misrepresentation—may occur (see Underlying Concepts).

--- Page 962 ---
Underlying Concepts
Capitalizing goodwill only when it is purchased in an arm’s-length
transaction, and not capitalizing any goodwill generated internally,
is another example of faithful representation (and verifiability)
winning out over relevance.
Purchased Goodwill
As indicated earlier, goodwill is recorded only when an entire
business is purchased. To record goodwill, a company compares
the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets
with the purchase price (cost) of the acquired business. The difference
is considered goodwill. Goodwill is the residual—the excess of
cost over fair value of the identifiable net assets acquired.
To illustrate, Feng, Inc. decides that it needs a parts division to
supplement its existing tractor distributorship. The president of Feng
is interested in buying Tractorling SA, a small concern in São Paulo,
Brazil. Illustration 12.4 presents Tractorling’s statement of financial
position.
Tractorling SA
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
Assets
Equity and Liabilities
Property, plant, and
equipment, net
$153,000 Share capital
$100,000
Inventory
42,000 Retained earnings
100,000
Accounts receivable
35,000 Current liabilities
55,000
Cash
25,000
 
Total assets
$255,000
Total equity and
liabilities
$255,000
ILLUSTRATION 12.4 Tractorling Statement of Financial
Position

--- Page 963 ---
After considerable negotiation, Tractorling decides to accept Feng’s
offer of $400,000. What, then, is the value of the goodwill, if any?
The answer is not obvious. Tractorling’s historical cost-based
statement of financial position does not disclose the fair values of its
identifiable assets. Suppose, though, that as the negotiations progress,
Feng investigates Tractorling’s underlying assets to determine their
fair values. Such an investigation may be accomplished either through
a purchase audit undertaken by Feng or by an independent appraisal
from some other source. The investigation determines the valuations
shown in Illustration 12.5.
Fair Values
Property, plant, and equipment, net $205,000
Patents
18,000
Inventory
122,000
Accounts receivable
35,000
Cash
25,000
Liabilities
(55,000)
Fair value of net assets
$350,000
ILLUSTRATION 12.5 Fair Value of Tractorling’s Net Assets
Normally, differences between fair value and book value are more
common among non-current assets than among current assets. Cash
obviously poses no problems as to value. Receivables normally are
fairly close to current valuation although they may at times need
certain adjustments due to inadequate bad debt provisions. Liabilities
usually are stated at book value. However, if interest rates have
changed since the company incurred the liabilities, a different
valuation (such as present value based on expected cash flows) is
appropriate. Careful analysis must be made to determine that no
unrecorded liabilities are present.
The $80,000 difference in Tractorling’s inventories ($122,000 –
$42,000) could result from a number of factors. The most likely is
that the company uses the average-cost method. Recall that during

--- Page 964 ---
periods of inflation, average-cost will result in lower inventory
valuations than FIFO.
In many cases, the values of non-current assets such as property,
plant, and equipment and intangibles may have increased
substantially over the years. This difference could be due to inaccurate
estimates of useful lives, continual expensing of small expenditures
(say, less than $300), inaccurate estimates of residual values, and the
discovery of some unrecorded assets. (For example, in Tractorling’s
case, analysis determines Patents have a fair value of $18,000.) Or,
fair values may have substantially increased.
Since the investigation now determines the fair value of net assets to
be $350,000, why would Feng pay $400,000? Undoubtedly,
Tractorling points to its established reputation, good credit rating, top
management team, and well-trained employees, as well as synergies
and cost savings in the combined entity. These factors make the value
of the business greater than $350,000. Feng places a premium on the
future earning power of these attributes as well as on the basic asset
structure of the company today.
Feng labels the difference between the purchase price of
$400,000 and the fair value of $350,000 as goodwill.
Goodwill is viewed as one or a group of unidentifiable values
(intangible assets), the cost of which “is measured by the difference
between the cost of the group of assets or enterprise acquired and the
sum of the assigned costs of individual tangible and identifiable
intangible assets acquired less liabilities assumed.”11 This procedure
for valuation is called a master valuation approach. It assumes
goodwill covers all the values that cannot be specifically identified
with any identifiable tangible or intangible asset. Illustration 12.6
shows this approach.

--- Page 965 ---
ILLUSTRATION 12.6 Determination of Goodwill—Master
Valuation Approach
Feng records this transaction as follows.
Property, Plant, and Equipment 205,000
Patents
18,000
Inventory
122,000
Accounts receivable
35,000
Cash
25,000
Goodwill
50,000
Liabilities
55,000
Cash
400,000
Companies often identify goodwill on the statement of financial
position as the excess of cost over the fair value of the net assets
acquired.
Goodwill Write-Off
Companies that recognize goodwill in a business combination
consider it to have an indefinite life and therefore should not
amortize it. Although goodwill may decrease in value over time,
predicting the actual life of goodwill and an appropriate pattern of
amortization is extremely difficult. In addition, investors find the
amortization charge of little use in evaluating financial performance.
Furthermore, the investment community wants to know the amount
invested in goodwill, which often is the largest intangible asset on a

--- Page 966 ---
company’s statement of financial position. Therefore, companies
adjust its carrying value only when goodwill is impaired. This
approach significantly impacts the income statements of some
companies.
Some believe that goodwill’s value eventually disappears. Therefore,
they argue, companies should charge goodwill to expense over the
periods affected, to better match expense with revenues. Others note
that the accounting treatment for purchased goodwill and goodwill
created internally should be consistent. They point out that companies
immediately expense goodwill created internally and should follow
the same treatment for purchased goodwill. Though these arguments
may have some merit, non-amortization of goodwill combined with an
adequate impairment test should provide the most useful financial
information to the investment community. We discuss the accounting
for goodwill impairments later in the chapter.
Bargain Purchase
In a few cases, the purchaser in a business combination pays less than
the fair value of the identifiable net assets. Such a situation is referred
to as a bargain purchase. A bargain purchase results from a market
imperfection, that is, the seller would have been better off to sell the
assets individually than in total. However, situations do occur (e.g., a
forced liquidation or distressed sale due to the death of a company
founder) in which the purchase price is less than the value of the net
identifiable assets. This excess amount is recorded as a gain by
the purchaser. [11]
The IASB notes that an economic gain is inherent in a bargain
purchase. The purchaser is better off by the amount by which the fair
value of what is acquired exceeds the amount paid. As an example, the
recently proposed merger between Deutsche Bank (DEU) and
Commerzbank (DEU) was asserted to depend on the ability of the
merged bank to realize a “badwill” gain of over €16 billion.12 Some
expressed concern that some companies may attempt inappropriate
gain recognition by making an intentional error in measurement of
the assets or liabilities. As a result, the IASB requires companies to

--- Page 967 ---
disclose the nature of this gain transaction. Such disclosure will help
users to better evaluate the quality of the earnings reported.
Impairment and Presentation of Intangible
Assets
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Identify impairment procedures and presentation requirements
for intangible assets.
An intangible asset is impaired when a company is not able to
recover the asset’s carrying amount either through using it or by
selling it. As discussed in Chapter 11, to determine whether a long-
lived asset (property, plant, and equipment or intangible assets) is
impaired, a review is made of the asset’s cash-generating ability
through use or sale. If the carrying amount is higher than the
recoverable amount, the difference is an impairment loss. If the
recoverable amount is greater than the carrying amount, no
impairment is recorded. [12] The specific procedures for recording
impairments depend on the type of intangible asset—limited-life or
indefinite-life (including goodwill).
Impairment of Limited-Life Intangibles
The rules that apply to impairments of property, plant, and
equipment also apply to limited-life intangibles. At each
statement of financial position date, a company should review limited-
life intangibles for impairment. Information indicating that an
impairment test should be performed might be internal (e.g., adverse
changes in performance) or external (e.g., adverse changes in the
business or regulatory environment, or technological or competitive
developments). If there is an indication that an intangible asset is
impaired, the company performs an impairment test: compare the
carrying value of the intangible asset to the recoverable amount.

--- Page 968 ---
Recall that the recoverable amount is defined as the higher of fair
value less costs to sell or value-in-use. Fair value less costs to sell
means what the asset could be sold for after deducting costs of
disposal. Value-in-use is the present value of cash flows expected from
the future use and eventual sale of the asset at the end of its useful
life. The impairment loss is the carrying amount of the asset less
the recoverable amount of the impaired asset. As with other
impairments, the loss is reported in profit or loss. Companies
generally report the loss in the “Other income and expense” section.
Illustration 12.7 presents an impairment loss situation.

--- Page 969 ---
Impairment Loss on Patent
Facts: Lerch SE has a patent on how to extract oil from shale rock,
with a carrying value of €5,000,000 at the end of 2021.
Unfortunately, several recent non-shale-oil discoveries adversely
affected the demand for shale-oil technology, indicating that the
patent is impaired. Lerch determines the recoverable amount for the
patent, based on value-in-use (because there is no active market for
the patent). Lerch estimates the patent’s value-in-use at €2,000,000,
based on the discounted expected net future cash flows at its market
rate of interest.
Questions: (a) What is the amount of the impairment? (b)
What is the journal entry to record the impairment?
Solution:
a. The impairment loss is computed as follows (based on value-in
use).
Carrying value of patent
€5,000,000
Recoverable amount (based on value-in-use) (2,000,000)
Loss on impairment
€3,000,000
b. Lerch records this loss as follows.
Loss on Impairment 3,000,000
Patents
3,000,000
After recognizing the impairment, the recoverable amount of
€2,000,000 is the new carrying amount or book value of the
patent. Lerch should amortize the patent’s recoverable amount
(new carrying amount) over its remaining useful life or legal life,
whichever is shorter.

--- Page 970 ---
ILLUSTRATION 12.7 Computation of Loss on Impairment
of Patent
Reversal of Impairment Loss
What happens if a review in a future year indicates that an intangible
asset is no longer impaired because the recoverable amount of the
asset is higher than the carrying amount? In that case, the
impairment loss may be reversed. To illustrate, continuing the Lerch
patent example, assume that the remaining life of the patent is five
years with zero residual value. Recall the carrying value of the patent
after impairment is €2,000,000 (€5,000,000 – €3,000,000). Thus,
Lerch’s amortization is €400,000 (€2,000,000 ÷ 5) over the
remaining five years of the patent’s life. The amortization expense and
related carrying amount after the impairment are shown in
Illustration 12.8.
Year
Amortization
Expense
Carrying
Amount
2022
€400,000
€1,600,000
(€2,000,000 −
€400,000)
2023
400,000
1,200,000
(€1,600,000 −
€400,000)
2024
400,000
800,000
(€1,200,000 −
€400,000)
2025
400,000
400,000 (€800,000 − €400,000)
2026
400,000
0 (€400,000 − €400,000)
ILLUSTRATION 12.8 Post-Impairment Carrying Value of
Patent
Early in 2023, based on improving conditions in the market for shale-
oil technology, Lerch remeasures the recoverable amount of the
patent to be €1,750,000. In this case, Lerch reverses a portion of the
recognized impairment loss with the following entry.
Patents (€1,750,000 – €1,600,000) 150,000

--- Page 971 ---
Recovery of Impairment Loss
150,000
The recovery of the impairment loss is reported in the “Other income
and expense” section of the income statement. The carrying amount
of the patent is now €1,750,000 (€1,600,000 + €150,000).13 Assuming
the remaining life of the patent is four years, Lerch records €437,500
(€1,750,000 ÷ 4) of amortization expense in 2023.
Impairment of Indefinite-Life Intangibles Other Than
Goodwill
Companies test indefinite-life intangibles (including goodwill) for
impairment annually.14 The impairment test for indefinite-life assets
other than goodwill is the same as that for limited-life intangibles.
That is, compare the recoverable amount of the intangible asset with
the asset’s carrying value. If the recoverable amount is less than the
carrying amount, the company recognizes an impairment.
Illustration 12.9 presents an impairment situation for an indefinite-
life intangible.

--- Page 972 ---
Impairment Loss on License
Facts: Arcon Radio purchased a broadcast license for €2,000,000.
The license is renewable every 10 years if the company provides
appropriate service and does not violate Government
Communications Commission (GCC) rules. Arcon Radio has renewed
the license with the GCC twice, at a minimal cost. Because it expects
cash flows to last indefinitely, Arcon reports the license as an
indefinite-life intangible asset. Recently, the GCC decided to auction
these licenses to the highest bidder instead of renewing them. Based
on recent auctions of similar licenses, Arcon Radio estimates the fair
value less costs to sell (the recoverable amount) of its license to be
€1,500,000.
Question: What is the impairment loss, if any, to be reported
by Arcon?
Solution: Arcon reports an impairment loss of €500,000,
computed as follows.
Carrying value of broadcast license
€2,000,000
Recoverable amount (based on fair value less costs to
sell)
(1,500,000)
Loss on impairment
€ 500,000
ILLUSTRATION 12.9 Computation of Loss on Impairment
of Broadcast License
Guidelines for reversal of impairments similar to those applied to
limited-life intangible assets are applied to indefinite-life intangible
assets other than goodwill.
Impairment of Goodwill

--- Page 973 ---
The timing of the impairment test for goodwill is the same as
that for other indefinite-life intangibles. That is, companies
must test goodwill at least annually. However, because goodwill
generates cash flows only in combination with other assets, the
impairment test is conducted based on the cash-generating unit to
which the goodwill is assigned. Recall from our discussion in Chapter
11 that companies identify a cash-generating unit based on the
smallest identifiable group of assets that generate cash flows
independently of the cash flows from other assets. Under IFRS, when
a company records goodwill in a business combination, it must assign
the goodwill to the cash-generating unit that is expected to benefit
from the synergies and other benefits arising from the business
combination.
To illustrate, assume that Kohlbuy AG has three divisions. It
purchased one division, Pritt Products, four years ago for €2 million.
Unfortunately, Pritt experienced operating losses over the last three
quarters. Kohlbuy management is now reviewing the division (the
cash-generating unit) for purposes of its annual impairment testing.
Illustration 12.10 lists the Pritt Division’s net assets, including the
associated goodwill of €900,000 from the purchase.
Property, plant, and equipment net
€ 800,000
Goodwill
900,000
Inventory
700,000
Receivables
300,000
Cash
200,000
Accounts and notes payable
(500,000)
Net assets
€2,400,000
ILLUSTRATION 12.10 Net Assets of Pritt Division,
Including Goodwill
Kohlbuy determines the recoverable amount for the Pritt Division to
be €2,800,000, based on a value-in-use estimate.15 Because the fair

--- Page 974 ---
value of the division exceeds the carrying amount of the net
assets, Kohlbuy does not recognize any impairment.
However, if the recoverable amount for the Pritt Division were less
than the carrying amount of the net assets, then Kohlbuy must record
an impairment. Illustration 12.11 presents the goodwill impairment
evalation for Kohlbuy.
Evaluating Goodwill Impairment
Facts: The carrying value of Kohlbuy’s Pritt Division is €2,400,000
(including Goodwill of €900,000). The recoverable amount of the
Pritt Division is €1,900,000.
Questions: (a) What the impairment loss, if any, should be
recorded? (b) What journal entry does Kohlbuy make to
record the impairment loss, if any?
Solution:
a. The amount of the impairment loss to be recorded is as
follows.
Recoverable amount of Pritt Division € 1,900,000
Net identifiable assets
(2,400,000)
Loss on impairment
€ 500,000
b. Kohlbuy makes the following entry to record the impairment.
Loss on Impairment 500,000
Goodwill
500,000
Following this entry, the carrying value of the goodwill is
€400,000.
ILLUSTRATION 12.11 Evaluation of Goodwill Impairment

--- Page 975 ---
If conditions change in subsequent periods, such that the recoverable
amount of the Pritt Division’s assets other than goodwill exceeds their
carrying value, Kohlbuy may reverse an impairment loss on the Pritt
Division assets other than goodwill. Goodwill impairment loss
reversals are not permitted. [14]16
Presentation of Intangible Assets
The reporting of intangible assets is similar to the reporting of
property, plant, and equipment. However, contra accounts may not be
shown for intangibles on the statement of financial position.
As indicated, on the statement of financial position, companies should
report as a separate item all intangible assets other than goodwill. If
goodwill is present, companies should report it separately. The IASB
concluded that since goodwill and other intangible assets differ
significantly from other types of assets, such disclosure benefits users
of the statement of financial position.
On the income statement, companies should present amortization
expense and impairment losses and reversals for intangible assets
other than goodwill separately in net income (usually in the operating
section), as a separate line item.
The notes to the financial statements should include information
about acquired intangible assets, including the amortization expense
for each type of asset. The notes should include information about
changes in the carrying amount of each type of intangible asset during
the period.
Illustration 12.12 shows an excerpt of the intangible asset reporting
for Nestlé (CHE). Note that Nestlé uses the label “Balance Sheet” for
its statement of financial position.

--- Page 976 ---
ILLUSTRATION 12.12 Nestlé’s Intangible Asset Disclosures
Research and Development Costs
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Describe the accounting and presentation for research and
development and similar costs.

--- Page 977 ---
Research and development (R&D) costs are not in themselves
intangible assets. However, we present the accounting for R&D costs
here because R&D activities frequently result in the development of
patents or copyrights (such as a new product, process, idea, formula,
composition, or literary work) that may provide future value.
As indicated in the opening story, many companies spend
considerable sums on research and development. Illustration 12.13
shows the outlays for R&D made by selected companies in a recent
year.
Company
Sales
(in millions) R&D/Sales
Volkswagen (DEU)
$291.1
5.26 %
Samsung (KOR)
195.9
7.20
Intel (USA)
55.9
20.57
Microsoft (USA)
86.8
13.13
Roche (CHE)
51.9
20.81
Google (USA)
66.0
14.85
Amazon (USA)
89.0
10.45
Toyota (JPN)
249.0
3.69
Novartis (CHE)
52.4
17.37
Johnson & Johnson (USA)
74.3
11.44
ILLUSTRATION 12.13 R&D Outlays, as a Percentage of
Sales
As discussed earlier, IFRS requires that all research costs be expensed
as incurred. Development costs are generally expensed as incurred.
However, once a project moves to the development phase, certain
development costs are capitalized. Capitalization begins when the
project is far enough along in the process such that the economic
benefits of the R&D project will probably flow to the company (the
project is economically viable).17 For purposes of homework, assume
that all R&D costs are expensed as incurred unless stated otherwise.

--- Page 978 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Global R&D Incentives
Research and development investments are the lifeblood of
product and process developments that lead to future cash flows
and growth. Countries around the world understand this and as a
result provide significant incentives in the form of tax credits,
“super deductions” (deductions greater than 100 percent), and
company tax rate reductions, including “patent box” rates for
companies that own and use patents registered in that country.
The following table provides a summary for seven major
economies.
Country
Statutory
Tax Rate
R&D Incentives
China
25.0%
Offers a 150% super deduction and favorable
tax rates for qualifying companies.
France
31.0%
Offers a variety of R&D incentives including
refundable tax credits (30% of first €100
million of R&D expenditure), grants, special
innovation tax credits, and a patent box
(income from licensing/sale of patent taxed
at reduced rate of 17%).
Ireland
12.5%
Offers a 25% incremental credit for all
expenditure exceeding the “base amount”
(total qualified expenditure incurred). A 25%
volume-based credit is applied to all
qualifying research expenses.
Japan
23.2%
Offers volume-based credits, as well as
incremental credits for companies that have
increased their research spending. The tax
credit ranges from 6–10% of total R&D
expenditure for large companies.
Singapore
17.0%
Offers super deductions under a complex

--- Page 979 ---
multi-tiered system for R&D carried out both
in Singapore and outside Singapore. Super
deductions can be as high as 250%.
United
Kingdom
19.0%
Offers a 130% super deduction or a taxable
credit of 11% thereafter. Also offers a full
deduction for capital costs incurred for R&D
that may be claimed in the year the
expenditure is incurred rather than
depreciated.
United
States
21.0%
Offers choice to report Alternative Simplified
Credit (14% of excess of qualified research
expenses) or Traditional Research Tax Credit
(20% of amount of qualified research
expenses exceeding a base amount).
As indicated, there are wide variations in both statutory tax rates
and R&D incentives. However, tax credits, government incentives,
and company tax rates may constitute only a fraction of the
relevant factors a company considers when evaluating
development centers. In addition, depending on the politics of tax
provisions, there can be year-to-year uncertainty in company tax
planning, thereby weakening the effectiveness of such incentives.
Sources: L. Cutler, D. Sayuk, and Camille Shoff, “Global R&D Incentives Compared,”
Journal of Accountancy (June 2013); and
www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/Tax/us-tax-surveyof-
global-investment-and-innovation-incentives.pdf.
Identifying R&D Activities
Illustration 12.14 shows the definitions for research activities
and development activities. These definitions differentiate research
and development costs from other similar costs. [16]

--- Page 980 ---
ILLUSTRATION 
12.14 
Research 
Activities 
versus
Development Activities
R&D activities do not include routine or periodic alterations to
existing products, production lines, manufacturing processes, and
other ongoing operations, even though these alterations may
represent improvements. For example, routine ongoing efforts to
refine, enrich, or improve the qualities of an existing product are not
considered R&D activities.
Accounting for R&D Activities
The costs associated with R&D activities and the accounting
treatments accorded them are as follows.
1. Materials, equipment, and facilities. Expense the entire
costs, unless the items have alternative future uses (in
other projects or otherwise). If there are alternative future uses,
carry the items as inventory and allocate as consumed, or
capitalize and depreciate as used.
2. Personnel. Expense as incurred salaries, wages, and other
related costs of personnel engaged in R&D.

--- Page 981 ---
3. Purchased intangibles. Recognize and measure at fair value.
After initial recognition, account for in accordance with their
nature (as either limited-life or indefinite-life intangibles).18
4. Contract services. Expense the costs of services performed by
others in connection with R&D as incurred.
5. Indirect costs. Include a reasonable allocation of indirect costs
in R&D costs, except for general and administrative costs, which
must be clearly related in order to be included in R&D.
Consistent with item 1 above, if a company owns a research facility
that conducts R&D activities and that has alternative future uses (in
other R&D projects or otherwise), it should capitalize the facility as an
operational asset. The company accounts for depreciation and other
costs related to such research facilities as R&D expenses.
To illustrate, assume that Next Century Incorporated develops,
produces, and markets laser machines for medical, industrial, and
defense uses. Illustration 12.15 lists the types of expenditures
related to its laser-machine activities, along with the recommended
accounting treatment.

--- Page 982 ---
Next Century Incorporated
Type of Expenditure
Accounting
Treatment
Rationale
1. Construction of long-range
research facility for use in
current and future projects
(three-story, 400,000-
square-foot building).
Capitalize and
depreciate as R&D
expense.
Has
alternative
future use.
2. Acquisition of R&D
equipment for use on
current project only.
Expense
immediately as
R&D.
Research cost.
3. Acquisition of machinery
for use on current and
future R&D projects.
Capitalize and
depreciate as R&D
expense.
Has
alternative
future use.
4. Purchase of materials for
use on current and future
R&D projects.
Record as Inventory
and allocate to R&D
projects; expense as
consumed.
Has
alternative
future use.
5. Salaries of research staff
designing new laser bone
scanner.
Expense
immediately as
R&D.
Research cost.
6. Research costs incurred
under contract with New
Horizon, Inc., and billable
monthly.
Record as a
receivable.
Not R&D cost
(reimbursable
expense).

--- Page 983 ---
Next Century Incorporated
7. Material, labor, and
overhead costs of prototype
laser scanner (economic
viability not achieved).
Expense
immediately as
R&D.
Does not meet
recognition
criteria.
8. Costs of testing prototype
and design modifications
(economic viability not
achieved).
Expense
immediately as
R&D.
Does not meet
recognition
criteria.
9. Legal fees to obtain patent
on new laser scanner.
Capitalize as patent
and amortize to
overhead as part of
cost of goods
manufactured.
Direct cost of
patent.
10. Executive salaries.
Expense as
operating expense.
Not R&D cost
(general and
administrative
expense).
11. Cost of marketing research
to promote new laser
scanner.
Expense as
operating expense.
Not R&D cost
(selling
expense).
12. Engineering costs incurred
to advance the laser
scanner to full production
stage (economic viability
achieved).
Capitalize as R&D.
Meets
recognition
criteria.

--- Page 984 ---
Next Century Incorporated
13. Costs of successfully
defending patent on laser
scanner.
Expense as legal
fees.
Such
expenditures
only maintain
expected
benefits.
14. Commissions to sales staff
marketing new laser
scanner.
Expense as
operating expense.
Not R&D cost
(selling
expense).
ILLUSTRATION 12.15 Sample R&D Expenditures and Their
Accounting Treatment

--- Page 985 ---
Evolving Issue
Recognition of R&D and Internally Generated Intangibles
The requirement that companies expense immediately all research
and most development costs (as well as start-up costs) incurred
internally is a practical solution. It ensures consistency in practice
and uniformity among companies. But the practice of immediately
writing off expenditures made in the expectation of benefiting
future periods is conceptually incorrect.
Proponents of immediate expensing contend that from an income
statement standpoint, long-run application of this standard
frequently makes little difference. They argue that because of the
ongoing nature of most companies’ R&D activities, the amount of
R&D cost charged to expense each accounting period is about the
same, whether there is immediate expensing or capitalization and
subsequent amortization.
Others criticize this practice. They believe that the statement of
financial position should report an intangible asset related to
expenditures that have future benefit. To preclude capitalization of
most R&D expenditures removes from the statement of financial
position what may be a company’s most valuable asset.
Indeed, research findings indicate that capitalizing R&D costs may
be helpful to investors. For example, one study showed a
significant relationship between R&D outlays and subsequent
benefits in the form of increased productivity, earnings, and
shareholder value for R&D-intensive companies. Another study
found that there was a significant decline in earnings usefulness
for companies that were forced to switch from capitalizing to
expensing R&D costs, and that the decline appears to persist over
time.
The current accounting for R&D and other internally generated
intangible assets represents one of the many trade-offs made
among relevance, faithful representation, and cost-benefit

--- Page 986 ---
considerations. The FASB and IASB have completed some limited-
scope projects on the accounting for intangible assets, and the
Boards have contemplated a joint project on the accounting for
identifiable intangible assets (i.e., excluding goodwill). Such a
project would address concerns that the current accounting
requirements lead to inconsistent treatments for some types of
intangible assets depending on how they arise. At present, that
project is on hold. The IASB has an active project on goodwill and
impairment (see www.ifrs.org/projects/work-plan/goodwill-and-
impairment).
Sources for research studies: Baruch Lev and Theodore Sougiannis, “The
Capitalization, Amortization, and Value-Relevance of R&D,” Journal of Accounting
and Economics (February 1996); and Martha L. Loudder and Bruce K. Behn,
“Alternative Income Determination Rules and Earnings Usefulness: The Case of R&D
Costs,” Contemporary Accounting Research (Fall 1995). See also the recent critique of
the accounting for intangible assets in Baruch Lev and Feng Gu, The End of
Accounting (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2016).
Costs Similar to R&D Costs
Many costs have characteristics similar to research and development
costs.19 Examples are:
1. Start-up costs for a new operation.
2. Initial operating losses.
3. Advertising costs.
For the most part, these costs are expensed as incurred, similar to the
accounting for research costs. We briefly explain these costs in the
following sections.
Start-Up Costs
Start-up costs are incurred for one-time activities to start a new
operation. Examples include opening a new plant, introducing a new
product or service, or conducting business in a new territory. Start-up
costs include organizational costs, such as legal and governmental
fees incurred to organize a new business entity.

--- Page 987 ---
The accounting for start-up costs is straightforward: Expense start-
up costs as incurred. The profession recognizes that companies
incur start-up costs with the expectation of future revenues or
increased efficiencies. However, determining the amount and timing
of future benefits is so difficult that a conservative approach—
expensing these costs as incurred—is required. [19]
To illustrate examples of start-up costs, assume that U.S.-based Hilo
Beverage Company decides to construct a new plant in Brazil. This
represents Hilo’s first entry into the Brazilian market. Hilo plans to
introduce the company’s major U.S. brands into Brazil on a locally
produced basis. The following costs might be involved:
1. Travel-related costs; costs related to employee salaries; and costs
related to feasibility studies, accounting, tax, and government
affairs.
2. Training of local employees related to product, maintenance,
computer systems, finance, and operations.
3. Recruiting, organizing, and training related to establishing a
distribution network.
Hilo Beverage should expense all these start-up costs as incurred.
Start-up activities commonly occur at the same time as activities
involving the acquisition of assets. For example, as it is incurring
start-up costs for the new plant, Hilo probably is also buying or
building property, plant, equipment, and inventory. Hilo should not
immediately expense the costs of these tangible assets. Instead, it
should report them on the statement of financial position using
appropriate IFRS reporting guidelines.
Initial Operating Losses
Some contend that companies should be allowed to capitalize initial
operating losses incurred in the start-up of a business. They argue that
such operating losses are an unavoidable cost of starting a business.
For example, assume that Hilo lost money in its first year of
operations and wishes to capitalize this loss. Hilo’s CEO argues that as

--- Page 988 ---
the company becomes profitable, it will offset these losses in future
periods. What do you think? We believe that this approach is
unsound, since losses have no future service potential and therefore
cannot be considered an asset.
IFRS requires that operating losses during the early years should not
be capitalized. In short, the accounting and reporting
standards should be no different for an enterprise trying to
establish a new business than they are for other enterprises.
[20]20
Advertising Costs
Over the years, PepsiCo (USA) has hired various pop stars, such as
Justin Timberlake and Beyoncé, to advertise its products. How should
it report such advertising costs related to its star spokespeople?
PepsiCo could expense the costs in various ways:
1. When the pop stars have completed their singing assignments.
2. The first time the advertising runs.
3. Over the estimated useful life of the advertising.
4. In an appropriate fashion to each of the three periods identified
above.
5. Over the period revenues are expected to result.
PepsiCo must expense these advertising costs as incurred.
The IASB acknowledges that advertising and promotional activities
may enhance or create customer relationships, which in turn generate
revenues. However, those expenditures are no different than other
internally generated intangible assets (e.g., brands, mastheads, and
customer lists), which primarily contribute to the development of the
business as a whole. Therefore, they do not meet the separately
identifiable criterion and should be expensed as incurred. [21]

--- Page 989 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Branded
For many companies, developing a strong brand image is as
important as developing the products they sell. Now more than
ever, companies see the power of a strong brand, enhanced by
significant and effective advertising investments.
As the following chart indicates, the value of brand investments is
substantial. Apple (USA) heads the list with an estimated brand
value of about $184.2 billion. Companies from around the globe
are represented in the top 20 brands.
Valuable Global Brands
(in billions)
1. Apple (USA)
$184.2
2. Google (USA)
141.7
3. Microsoft (USA)
80.0
4. Coca-Cola (USA)
69.7
5. Amazon (USA)
64.8
6. Samsung (KOR)
56.2
7. Toyota (JPN)
50.3
8. Facebook (USA)
48.2
9. Mercedes-Benz (DEU)
47.8
10. IBM (USA)
46.0
Source: Interbrand Corp.
Companies may include the value of a brand in the financial
statements under goodwill. But, generally you will not find the
estimated values of brands recorded in companies’ statements of
financial position. The reason? The subjectivity that goes into
estimating a brand’s value. In some cases, analysts base an
estimate of brand value on opinion polls or on some multiple of
advertising spending. For example, in estimating the brand values

--- Page 990 ---
shown in the table, Interbrand Corp. (USA) estimates the
percentage of the overall future revenues the brand will generate
and then discounts the net cash flows to arrive at a present value.
Some analysts believe that information on brand values is
relevant. Others voice valid concerns about the reliability of brand
value estimates due to subjectivity in the estimates for revenues,
costs, and the risk component of the discount rate.
Source: Interbrand Corp., Best Global Brands Report (2017).
Presentation of Research and Development Costs
Companies should disclose in the financial statements (generally in
the notes) the total R&D costs charged to expense each period for
which they present an income statement. GlaxoSmithKline (GBR),
a global research pharmaceutical company, reported research and
development in its recent income statement, with related accounting
policy discussion in the notes as shown in Illustration 12.16.

--- Page 991 ---
GlaxoSmithKline
(in millions)
31 December 2018
Turnover
£30,821
Cost of Sales
(10,241)
Gross Profit
20,580
Selling, General, and Administrative
(9,915)
Research and Development
(3,893)
Royalty Income
299
Other Operating Income
(1,588)
Operating Profit
£ 5,483
Note 2 (in part) Research and development
Research and development expenditure is charged to the income
statement in the period in which it is incurred. Development
expenditure is capitalised when the criteria for recognising an asset
are met, usually when a regulatory filing has been made in a major
market and approval is considered highly probable. Property, plant
and equipment used for research and development is capitalised and
depreciated in accordance with the Group’s policy.
ILLUSTRATION 12.16 R&D Reporting
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
amortization
bargain purchase

--- Page 992 ---
business combination
cash-generating unit
copyright
development activities
development phase
economic viability
franchise
goodwill
impaired
impairment loss
indefinite useful life (intangibles)
intangible assets
license (permit)
limited useful life (intangibles)
master valuation approach
organizational costs
patent
recoverable amount
research activities
research and development (R&D) costs
research phase
start-up costs
trademark, trade name
Learning Objectives Review

--- Page 993 ---
1 Discuss the characteristics, valuation, and amortization
of intangible assets.
Intangible assets have three main characteristics: (1) they are
identifiable, (2) they lack physical existence, and (3) they are not
monetary assets. In most cases, intangible assets provide services over
a period of years and so are normally classified as non-current assets.
Intangibles are recorded at cost. Cost includes all acquisition
costs and expenditures needed to make the intangible asset ready for
its intended use. If intangibles are acquired in exchange for shares or
other assets, the cost of the intangible is the fair value of the
consideration given or the fair value of the intangible received,
whichever is more clearly evident. When a company makes a “basket
purchase” of several intangibles or a combination of intangibles and
tangibles, it should allocate the cost on the basis of relative fair values.
Intangibles have either a limited useful life or an indefinite
useful life. Companies amortize limited-life intangibles. They do not
amortize indefinite-life intangibles. Limited-life intangibles should be
amortized by systematic charges to expense over their useful lives.
The useful lives should reflect the period over which these assets will
contribute to cash flows. The amount to report for amortization
expense should reflect the pattern in which a company consumes or
uses up the asset, if it can reliably determine that pattern. Otherwise,
use a straight-line approach.
2 Describe the accounting for various types of intangible
assets.
Major types of intangibles are (1) marketing-related intangibles, used
in the marketing or promotion of products or services; (2) customer-
related intangibles, resulting from interactions with outside parties;
(3) artistic-related intangibles, giving ownership rights to such items
as plays and literary works; (4) contract-related intangibles,
representing the value of rights that arise from contractual
arrangements; (5) technology-related intangibles, relating to

--- Page 994 ---
innovations or technological advances; and (6) goodwill, arising from
business combinations.
3 Explain the accounting issues for recording goodwill.
Unlike receivables, inventories, and patents that a company can sell or
exchange individually in the marketplace, goodwill can be identified
only with the company as a whole. Goodwill is a “going concern”
valuation and is recorded only when an entire business is
purchased. A company should not capitalize goodwill generated
internally. The future benefits of goodwill may have no relationship to
the costs incurred in the development of that goodwill. Goodwill may
exist even in the absence of specific costs to develop it.
To record goodwill, a company compares the fair value of the net
tangible and identifiable intangible assets with the purchase price of
the acquired business. The difference is considered goodwill. Goodwill
is the residual. Goodwill is often identified on the statement of
financial position as the excess of cost over the fair value of the net
assets acquired.
4 Identify impairment procedures and presentation
requirements for intangible assets.
An intangible asset is impaired when a company is not able to recover
the asset’s carrying amount either through using it or by selling it.
Limited-life intangibles are reviewed annually to determine if there
are impairment indicators; if so, the impairment test is performed.
Indefinite-life intangibles, including goodwill, must be tested for
impairment every year. An impairment loss is recorded in net income
if the recoverable amount (the greater of fair value less costs to sell
and value-in-use) of an intangible asset is less than the carrying value.
Impairment losses on intangible assets (other than goodwill) may be
reversed but only up to the carrying amount that would have been
recorded in the absence of the impairment.

--- Page 995 ---
With respect to presentation, on the statement of financial position,
companies should report all intangible assets other than goodwill as a
separate item. Contra accounts are not normally shown. If goodwill is
present, it too should be reported as a separate item. On the income
statement, companies should report amortization expense and
impairment losses in operating income. The notes to the financial
statements have additional detailed information.
5 Describe the accounting and presentation for research
and development and similar costs.
R&D costs are not in themselves intangible assets, but R&D activities
frequently result in the development of something a company patents
or copyrights. The difficulties in accounting for R&D expenditures are
(1) identifying the costs associated with particular activities, projects,
or achievements; and (2) determining the magnitude of the future
benefits and length of time over which a company may realize such
benefits. Because of these latter uncertainties, companies are required
to expense all research costs when incurred. Certain costs incurred
during the development phase of an R&D project are capitalized when
an R&D project achieves economic viability.
Illustration 12.15 shows the costs associated with R&D activities and
the accounting treatment accorded them. Many costs have
characteristics similar to R&D costs. Examples are start-up costs,
initial operating losses, and advertising costs. For the most part, these
costs are expensed as incurred, similar to the accounting for all
research and many development costs. Financial statements must
disclose the total R&D costs charged to expense each period for which
an income statement is presented.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review
exercises with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem

--- Page 996 ---
Sky ASA, organized in 2022, provided you with the following
information.
1. Purchased a license for €20,000 on July 1, 2022. The license
gives Sky exclusive rights to sell its services in the provincial
region and will expire on July 1, 2030.
2. Purchased a patent on January 2, 2023, for €40,000. It is
estimated to have a 5-year life.
3. Costs incurred to develop an exclusive Internet connection
process as of June 1, 2023, were €45,000. The process has an
indefinite life.
4. On April 1, 2023, Sky purchased a small circuit board
manufacturer for €350,000. Goodwill recorded in the
transaction was €90,000.
5. On July 1, 2023, legal fees of €11,400 were incurred for
application and filing of a new patent, which will expire at the
same time as the patent purchased on January 2, 2023.
6. Research and development costs incurred as of September 1,
2023, were €75,000. None of the related projects involved had
achieved economic viability.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entries to record all the entries related to
the patent during 2023.
b. At December 31, 2023, an impairment test is performed on the
license purchased in 2022. It is estimated that the net cash
flows to be received from the license will be €13,000, and its
recoverable amount is €7,000. Compute the amount of
impairment, if any, to be recorded on December 31, 2023.
c. What is the amount to be reported for intangible assets on the
statement of financial position at December 31, 2022? At
December 31, 2023?

--- Page 997 ---
Solution
a. 
January 2, 2023
Patents
40,000
Cash
40,000
July 1, 2023
Patents
11,400
Cash
11,400
December 31, 2023
Patent Amortization Expense
9,267
Patents
9,267
Computation of Patent Amortization Expense:
€40,000 × 12/60 = €8,000
€11,400 × 6/54 =
1,267
Total
€9,267
b. Computation of impairment loss:
Cost
€20,000
Less: Accumulated amortization [€20,000 × (18 ÷ 96)]
3,750
Book value
€16,250
Book value of €16,250 is greater than the recoverable amount.
Therefore, the license is impaired. The impairment loss is
computed as follows.
Book value
€16,250
Recoverable amount
7,000
Loss on impairment € 9,250
c. Intangible assets as of December 31, 2022:

--- Page 998 ---
Licenses
€18,750*
*Cost
€ 20,000
Less: Accumulated amortization [€20,000
× (6 ÷ 96)]
1,250
Total
€ 18,750
Intangible assets as of December 31, 2023:
Licenses
€ 7,000
Patents (€40,000 + €11,400 − €9,267)
42,133
Goodwill
90,000
Total
€139,133
All the costs to develop the Internet connection process and the
research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and
resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. What are the three main characteristics of intangible assets?
2. If intangibles are acquired for shares, how is the cost of the
intangible determined?
3. Intangibles have either a limited useful life or an indefinite useful
life. How should these two different types of intangibles be
amortized?
4. Why does IFRS make a distinction between internally created
intangibles and purchased intangibles?
5. In 2022, Ghostbusters SA spent €420,000 for “goodwill” visits by
sales personnel to key customers. The purpose of these visits was to
build a solid, friendly relationship for the future and to gain insight

--- Page 999 ---
into the problems and needs of the companies served. How should
this expenditure be reported?
6. What are factors to be considered in estimating the useful life of an
intangible asset?
7. What should be the pattern of amortization for a limited-life
intangible?
8. Novartis (CHE) acquired a trademark that is helpful in
distinguishing one of its new products. The trademark is renewable
every 10 years at minimal cost. All evidence indicates that this
trademarked product will generate cash flows for an indefinite period
of time. How should this trademark be amortized?
9. McNabb Company spent $190,000 developing a new process prior
to achieving economic viability, $45,000 in legal fees to obtain a
patent, and $91,000 to market the process that was patented, all in the
year 2022. How should these costs be accounted for in 2022?
10. Izzy Ltd. purchased a patent for £350,000 which has an estimated
useful life of 10 years. Its pattern of use or consumption cannot be
reliably determined. Prepare the entry to record the amortization of
the patent in its first year of use.
11. Explain the difference between artistic-related intangible assets
and contract-related intangible assets.
12. What is goodwill? What is a bargain purchase?
13. Under what circumstances is it appropriate to record goodwill in
the accounts? How should goodwill, properly recorded on the books,
be written off in order to conform with IFRS?
14. In examining financial statements, financial analysts often write
off goodwill immediately. Comment on this procedure.
15. Braxton Inc. is considering the write-off of a limited-life intangible
because of its lack of profitability. Explain to the management of
Braxton how to determine whether a write-off is permitted.
16. Last year, Zeno Company recorded an impairment on an
intangible asset. Recent appraisals indicate that the asset has

--- Page 1000 ---
increased in value. Should Zeno record this recovery in value?
17. Explain how losses on impaired intangible assets should be
reported in income.
18. Shi Ltd. determines that its goodwill is impaired. It finds that its
recoverable amount is HK$3,600,000 and its recorded goodwill is
HK$4,000,000. The fair value of its identifiable assets is
HK$14,500,000. What is the amount of goodwill impaired?
19. What is the nature of research and development costs? Can
development costs be capitalized? Explain.
20. Research and development activities may include (a) personnel
costs, (b) materials and equipment costs, and (c) indirect costs. What
is the recommended accounting treatment for these three types of
R&D costs?
21. Which of the following activities should be expensed currently as
R&D costs?
a. Testing in search for or evaluation of product or process
alternatives.
b. Engineering follow-through in an early phase of commercial
production.
c. Legal work in connection with patent applications or litigation,
and the sale or licensing of patents.
22. Indicate the proper accounting for the following items.
a. Organization costs.
b. Advertising costs.
c. Operating losses.
23. In 2021, Jackie Chan Ltd. developed a new product that will be
marketed in 2023. In connection with the development of this
product, the following costs were incurred in 2022: research and
development costs ¥40,000,000, materials and supplies consumed
¥6,000,000, and compensation paid to research consultants

--- Page 1001 ---
¥12,500,000. (¥23,000,000 of the development phase costs were
incurred after the product became economically viable.) It is
anticipated that these costs will be recovered in 2025. What is the
amount of research and development costs that Chan should record in
2022 as a charge to expense?
24. Recently, a group of university students decided to form a
company for the purposes of selling a process to recycle the waste
product from manufacturing cheese. Some of the initial costs involved
were legal fees and office expenses incurred in starting the business,
governmental fees, and stamp taxes. One student wants to charge
these costs against revenue in the current period. Another wishes to
defer these costs and amortize them in the future. Which student is
correct?
25. An intangible asset with an estimated useful life of 30 years was
acquired on January 1, 2012, for $540,000. On January 1, 2022, a
review was made of intangible assets and their expected service lives,
and it was determined that this asset had an estimated useful life of
30 more years from the date of the review. What is the amount of
amortization for this intangible in 2022?
Brief Exercises
BE12.1 (LO 2) Celine Dion Corporation purchases a patent from
Salmon Company on January 1, 2022, for $54,000. The patent has a
remaining legal life of 16 years. Celine Dion feels the patent will be
useful for 10 years. Prepare Celine Dion’s journal entries to record the
purchase of the patent and 2022 amortization.
BE12.2 (LO 2) Use the information provided in BE12.1. Assume that
at January 1, 2024, the carrying amount of the patent on Celine Dion’s
books is $43,200. In January, Celine Dion spends $24,000
successfully defending a patent suit. Celine Dion still feels the patent
will be useful until the end of 2031. Prepare the journal entries to
record the $24,000 expenditure and 2024 amortization.
BE12.3 (LO 2) Larry Lyon SA spent €68,000 in attorney fees while
developing the trade name of its new product, the Mean Bean

--- Page 1002 ---
Machine. Prepare the journal entries to record the €68,000
expenditure and the first year’s amortization, using an 8-year life.
BE12.4 (LO 2) Gershwin plc obtained a franchise from Sonic
Hedgehog Inc. for a cash payment of £120,000 on April 1, 2022. The
franchise grants Gershwin the right to sell certain products and
services for a period of 8 years. Prepare Gershwin’s April 1 journal
entry and December 31 adjusting entry.
BE12.5 (LO 3) On September 1, 2022, Winans Ltd. acquired Aumont
Enterprises for a cash payment of £700,000. At the time of purchase,
Aumont’s statement of financial position showed assets of £620,000,
liabilities of £200,000, and equity of £420,000. The fair value of
Aumont’s assets is estimated to be £800,000. Compute the amount of
goodwill acquired by Winans.
BE12.6 (LO 4) Kenoly Corporation owns a patent that has a carrying
amount of $300,000. Kenoly expects future net cash flows from this
patent to total $210,000 over its remaining life of 10 years. The
recoverable amount of the patent is $110,000. Prepare Kenoly’s
journal entry, if necessary, to record the loss on impairment.
BE12.7 (LO 4) Use the information in BE12.6. Assume that at the
end of the year following the impairment (after recording
amortization expense), the estimated recoverable amount for the
patent is $130,000. Prepare Kenoly’s journal entry, if needed.
BE12.8 (LO 4) Waters Ltd. purchased Jang Group 3 years ago and at
that time recorded goodwill of HK$400,000. The Jang Division’s net
assets, including the goodwill, have a carrying amount of
HK$800,000. The fair value of the division is estimated to be
HK$1,000,000. Prepare Waters’ journal entry, if necessary, to record
impairment of the goodwill.
BE12.9 (LO 4) Use the information provided in BE12.8. Assume that
the recoverable amount of the division is estimated to be
HK$750,000. Prepare Waters’ journal entry, if necessary, to record
impairment of the goodwill.
BE12.10 (LO 5) Sujo Ltd. commenced operations in early 2022. The
company incurred HK$60,000,000 of costs such as fees to

--- Page 1003 ---
underwriters, legal fees, governmental fees, and promotional
expenditures during its formation. Prepare journal entries to record
the HK$60,000,000 expenditure and 2022 amortization, if any.
BE12.11 (LO 5) Treasure Land plc incurred the following costs in
2022.
Cost of laboratory research aimed at discovery of new
knowledge
£120,000
Cost of testing in search for product alternatives
100,000
Cost of engineering activity required to advance the design
of a product to the manufacturing stage
210,000
Prototype testing subsequent to meeting economic
viability
75,000
£505,000
Prepare the necessary 2022 journal entry or entries for Treasure Land.
BE12.12 (LO 5) Indicate whether the following items are capitalized
or expensed in the current year.
a. Purchase cost of a patent from a competitor.
b. Research costs.
c. Development costs (after achieving economic viability).
d. Organizational costs.
e. Costs incurred internally to create goodwill.
BE12.13 (LO 4) Nieland Industries had one patent recorded on its
books as of January 1, 2022. This patent had a book value of $288,000
and a remaining useful life of 8 years. During 2022, Nieland incurred
research costs of $96,000 and brought a patent infringement suit
against a competitor. On December 1, 2022, Nieland received the good
news that its patent was valid and that its competitor could not use
the process Nieland had patented. The company incurred $85,000 to
defend this patent. At what amount should the patent(s) be reported

--- Page 1004 ---
on the December 31, 2022, statement of financial position, assuming
monthly amortization of patents?
BE12.14 (LO 4) Sinise Industries acquired two copyrights during
2022. One copyright related to a textbook that was developed
internally at a cost of €9,900. This textbook is estimated to have a
useful life of 3 years from September 1, 2022, the date it was
published. The second copyright (a history research textbook) was
purchased from University Press on December 1, 2022, for €24,000.
This textbook has an indefinite useful life. How should these two
copyrights be reported on Sinise’s statement of financial position as of
December 31, 2022?
Exercises
E12.1 (LO 1, 2) (Classification Issues—Intangibles) The
following is a list of items that could be included in the intangible
assets section of the statement of financial position.
1. Investment in an affiliate company.
2. Timberland.
3. Cost of engineering activity required to advance the design of a
product to the manufacturing stage.
4. Lease prepayment (6 months’ rent paid in advance).
5. Cost of equipment obtained.
6. Cost of searching for applications of new research findings.
7. Costs incurred in the formation of a company.
8. Operating losses incurred in the start-up of a business.
9. Training costs incurred in start-up of new operation.
10. Purchase cost of a franchise.
11. Goodwill generated internally.
12. Cost of testing in search for product alternatives.
13. Goodwill acquired in the purchase of a business.

--- Page 1005 ---
14. Cost of developing a patent (before achieving economic viability).
15. Cost of purchasing a patent from an inventor.
16. Legal costs incurred in securing a patent.
17. Unrecovered costs of a successful legal suit to protect the patent.
18. Cost of conceptual formulation of possible product alternatives.
19. Cost of purchasing a copyright.
20. Development costs incurred after achieving economic viability.
21. Long-term receivables.
22. Cost of developing a trademark.
23. Cost of purchasing a trademark.
Instructions
a. Indicate which items on the list above would generally be
reported as intangible assets in the statement of financial
position.
b. Indicate how, if at all, the items not reportable as intangible
assets would be reported in the financial statements.
E12.2 (LO 1, 2) (Classification Issues—Intangibles) The
following is selected account information related to Matt Perry Inc. as
of December 21, 2022. All these accounts have debit balances.
Cable television franchises
Film contract rights
Music copyrights
Customer lists
Research and development
costs
Prepaid expenses
Goodwill
Covenants not to compete
Cash
Brand names
Accounts receivable
Notes receivable
Property, plant, and equipment Investments in associated
companies

--- Page 1006 ---
Internet domain name
Organization costs
Land
Instructions
Identify which items should be classified as intangible assets. For
those items not classified as intangible assets, indicate where they
would be reported in the financial statements.
E12.3 (LO 1, 2) (Classification Issues—Intangibles) Langrova
SpA has the following amounts reported in its general ledger at
December 31, 2022.
Organization costs
€24,000
Trademarks
20,000
Bonds payable
35,000
Deposits with advertising agency for ads to promote
goodwill of company
10,000
Excess of cost over fair value of net identifiable assets of
acquired company
75,000
Cost of equipment acquired for research and development
projects; the equipment has an alternative future use
90,000
Costs of developing a secret formula for a product that is
expected to be marketed for at least 20 years (all research
phase)
70,000
Instructions
a. On the basis of the information above, compute the total amount
to be reported by Langrova for intangible assets on its statement
of financial position at December 31, 2022. As noted, the
equipment has alternative future use.
b. If an item is not to be included in intangible assets, explain its
proper treatment for reporting purposes.

--- Page 1007 ---
E12.4 (LO 2, 5) (Intangible Amortization) Presented below is
selected information for Palmiero Company.
1. Palmiero purchased a patent from Vania Co. for $1,500,000 on
January 1, 2020. The patent is being amortized over its remaining
legal life of 10 years, expiring on January 1, 2030. During 2022,
Palmiero determined that the economic benefits of the patent
would not last longer than 6 years from the date of acquisition.
What amount should be reported in the statement of financial
position for the patent, net of accumulated amortization, at
December 31, 2022?
2. Palmiero bought a franchise from Dougherty Co. on January 1,
2021, for $350,000. The carrying amount of the franchise on
Dougherty’s books on January 1, 2021, was $500,000. The
franchise agreement had an estimated useful life of 30 years.
Because Palmiero must enter a competitive bidding at the end of
2030, it is unlikely that the franchise will be retained beyond
2030. What amount should be amortized for the year ended
December 31, 2022?
3. On January 1, 2020, Palmiero incurred organization costs of
$275,000. What amount of organization expense should be
reported in 2022?
4. Palmiero purchased the license for distribution of a popular
consumer product on January 1, 2022, for $150,000. It is
expected that this product will generate cash flows for an
indefinite period of time. The license has an initial term of 5 years
but by paying a nominal fee, Palmiero can renew the license
indefinitely for successive 5-year terms. What amount should be
amortized for the year ended December 31, 2022?
Instructions
Answer the questions asked about each of the factual situations.
E12.5 (LO 2, 5) (Correct Intangible Assets Account) As the
recently appointed auditor for Ng Ltd., you have been asked to

--- Page 1008 ---
examine selected accounts before the 6-month financial statements of
June 30, 2022, are prepared. The controller for Ng mentions that only
one account is kept for intangible assets.
Intangible Assets
Debit
Credit
Balance
Jan. 4 Research and
development
costs (prior to
achieving
economic
viability)
HK$940,000
HK$ 940,000
Jan. 5 Legal costs to
obtain patent
75,000
1,015,000
Jan. 31 Payment of 7
months rent on
property leased by
Ng
91,000
1,106,000
Feb. 11 Share premium
on ordinary
shares
HK$250,000
856,000
Mar. 31 Unamortized
bond discount on
bonds due March
31, 2042
84,000
940,000
Apr. 30 Promotional
expenses related
to start-up of
business
207,000
1,147,000
June 30 Operating losses
for first 6 months
141,000
1,288,000
Instructions
Prepare the entry or entries necessary to correct this account. Assume
that the patent has a useful life of 12 years.

--- Page 1009 ---
E12.6 (LO 2, 5) (Recording and Amortization of Intangibles)
Powerglide plc, organized in 2021, has set up a single account for all
intangible assets. The following summary discloses the debit entries
that have been recorded during 2022.
1/2/22 Purchased patent (8-year life)
£ 380,000
4/1/22 Goodwill (indefinite life)
360,000
7/1/22 Purchased franchise with 10-year life; expiration
date 7/1/32
450,000
8/1/22 Payment of copyright (5-year life)
156,000
9/1/22 Development costs to increase the value of the
patent (£55,000 incurred after economic viability
achieved)
215,000
£1,561,000
Instructions
Prepare the necessary entries to clear the Intangible Assets account
and to set up separate accounts for distinct types of intangibles. Make
the entries as of December 31, 2022, recording any necessary
amortization and reflecting all balances accurately as of that date.
(Use straight-line amortization.)
E12.7 (LO 2, 4) (Accounting for Trade Name) In early January
2021, Reymont Corporation applied for a trade name, incurring legal
costs of $18,000. In January 2022, Reymont incurred $7,800 of legal
fees in a successful defense of its trade name.
Instructions
a. Compute 2021 amortization, 12/31/21 book value, 2022
amortization, and 12/31/22 book value if the company amortizes
the trade name over 10 years.
b. Compute the 2022 amortization and the 12/31/22 book value,
assuming that at the beginning of 2022, Reymont determines that
the trade name will provide no future benefits beyond December
31, 2025.

--- Page 1010 ---
c. Ignoring the response for part (b), compute the 2023
amortization and the 12/31/23 book value, assuming that at the
beginning of 2023, based on new market research, Reymont
determines that the recoverable amount of the trade name is
$12,000.
E12.8 (LO 5) (Accounting for Organization Costs) Fontenot SA
was organized in 2021 and began operations at the beginning of 2022.
The company is involved in interior design consulting services. The
following costs were incurred in 2022, prior to the start of operations.
Attorney’s fees in connection with organization of the
company
€17,000
Purchase of drafting and design equipment
10,000
Costs of meetings to discuss organizational activities
7,000
Government filing fees for company start-up
1,000
€35,000
Instructions
a. Compute the total amount of organization costs incurred by
Fontenot.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record organization costs for 2022.
E12.9 (LO 2, 5) (Accounting for Patents, Franchises, and
R&D) Devon Harris Company has provided information on intangible
assets as follows.
A patent was purchased from Bradtke Company for $2,500,000 on
January 1, 2021. Harris estimated the remaining useful life of the
patent to be 10 years. The patent was carried in Bradtke’s accounting
records at a net book value of $2,000,000 when Bradtke sold it to
Harris.
During 2022, a franchise was purchased from Greene Company for
$580,000. In addition, 5% of revenue from the franchise must be paid
to Greene. Revenue from the franchise for 2022 was $2,500,000.

--- Page 1011 ---
Harris estimates the useful life of the franchise to be 10 years and
takes a full year’s amortization in the year of purchase.
Harris incurred research and development costs in 2022 as follows.
Materials and equipment $142,000
Personnel
189,000
Indirect costs
102,000
$433,000
Harris estimates that these costs will be recouped by December 31,
2025, but due to uncertainty in the market, its process has not
achieved economic viability. The materials and equipment purchased
have no alternative uses.
On January 1, 2022, because of recent events in the field, Harris
estimates that the remaining life of the patent purchased on January
1, 2021, is only 5 years from January 1, 2022.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule showing the intangibles section of Harris’s
statement of financial position at December 31, 2022. Show
supporting computations in good form.
b. Prepare a schedule showing the income statement effect for the
year ended December 31, 2022, as a result of the facts above.
Show supporting computations in good form.
E12.10 (LO 2) (Accounting for Patents) During 2021,
Matsumura Ltd. spent ¥170,000 in research costs. As a result, a new
product called the New Age Piano was patented. The patent was
obtained on October 1, 2021, and had a legal life of 20 years and a
useful life of 10 years. Legal costs of ¥24,000 related to the patent
were incurred as of October 1, 2021. (Amounts are in thousands.)
Instructions
a. Prepare all journal entries required in 2021 and 2022 as a result
of the transactions above.

--- Page 1012 ---
b. On June 1, 2023, Matsumura spent ¥12,400 in legal fees, which
resulted in a new patent. The estimate of useful life is 12 years
from June 1, 2023. Prepare all journal entries required in 2023
and 2024.
c. In 2025, Matsumura determined that a competitor’s product
would make the New Age Piano obsolete and the patent worthless
by December 31, 2026. Prepare all journal entries required in
2025 and 2026.
E12.11 (LO 2) (Accounting for Patents) Yoon Industries has the
following patents on its December 31, 2021, statement of financial
position (amounts in thousands).
Patent Item Initial Cost Date Acquired Useful Life at Date Acquired
Patent A
₩40,800
3/1/18
17 years
Patent B
₩15,000
7/1/19
10 years
Patent C
₩14,400
9/1/20
4 years
The following events occurred during the year ended December 31,
2022.
1. Research and development costs of ₩245,700 were incurred
during the year. All of these costs (except for ₩28,000 incurred
on May 1, 2022, for Patent C) were incurred prior to projects
achieving economic viability.
2. Patent D was purchased on July 1 for ₩28,500. This patent has a
useful life of 9 ½ years.
3. As a result of reduced demands for certain products protected by
Patent B, a possible impairment of Patent B’s value may have
occurred at December 31, 2022. A market-based fair value is not
available. The controller for Yoon estimates the expected future
cash flows from Patent B will be as follows.
Year Expected Future Cash Flows
2023
₩2,000

--- Page 1013 ---
2024
2,000
2025
2,000
The proper discount rate to be used for these cash flows is 8%.
(Assume that the cash flows occur at the end of the year.)
Instructions
a. Compute the total carrying amount of Yoon’s patents on its
December 31, 2021, statement of financial position.
b. Compute the total carrying amount of Yoon’s patents on its
December 31, 2022, statement of financial position.
E12.12 (LO 3) (Accounting for Goodwill) Fred Graf, owner of
Graf Interiors, is negotiating for the purchase of Terrell Galleries. The
following statement of financial position of Terrell is given in an
abbreviated form.
Terrell Galleries
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
Assets
Equity and Liabilities
Buildings
(net)
$200,000 Share capital—
ordinary
$200,000
Equipment
(net)
175,000 Retained earnings
25,000 $225,000
Copyrights
(net)
30,000 Accounts payable
50,000
Land
70,000 Long-term notes
payable
300,000
Cash
100,000
Total liabilities
350,000
Total assets
$575,000 Total equity and
liabilities
$575,000
Graf and Terrell agree that:

--- Page 1014 ---
1. Land is undervalued by $50,000.
2. Equipment is overvalued by $5,000.
Terrell agrees to sell the gallery to Graf for $380,000.
Instructions
Prepare the entry to record the purchase of Terrell Galleries on Graf’s
books.
E12.13 (LO 3) (Accounting for Goodwill) On July 1, 2022,
Brandon SE purchased Mills Company by paying €250,000 cash and
issuing a €150,000 note payable. At July 1, 2022, the statement of
financial position of Mills Company was as follows.
Buildings (net)
€ 75,000 Equity
€235,000
Equipment (net)
70,000 Accounts payable
200,000
Trademarks
10,000
€435,000
Land
40,000
Inventory
100,000
Accounts receivable
90,000
Cash
50,000
€435,000
The recorded amounts all approximate current values except for land
(fair value of €80,000), inventory (fair value of €125,000), and
trademarks (fair value of €15,000).
Instructions
a. Prepare the July 1 entry for Brandon to record the purchase.
b. Prepare the December 31 entry for Brandon to record
amortization of intangibles. The trademarks have an estimated
useful life of 4 years with a residual value of €3,000.
E12.14 (LO 4) (Copyright Impairment) The following
information is related to a copyright owned by Botticelli Company at

--- Page 1015 ---
December 31, 2022.
Cost
$8,600,000
Carrying amount
4,300,000
Recoverable amount
3,400,000
Assume that Botticelli Company will continue to use this copyright in
the future. As of December 31, 2022, the copyright is estimated to
have a remaining useful life of 10 years.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry (if any) to record the impairment of the
asset at December 31, 2022. The company does not use
accumulated amortization accounts.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record amortization expense for 2023
related to the copyright.
c. The fair value of the copyright at December 31, 2023, is
$3,500,000. Prepare the journal entry (if any) necessary to record
the increase in fair value.
E12.15 (LO 3, 4) (Goodwill Impairment) The following is net
asset information related to the Ting Division of Santana Ltd.
Ting Division
Net Assets
As of December 31, 2022
(in millions)
Property, plant, and equipment (net) HK$2,600
Goodwill
200
Accounts receivable
200
Cash
60
Less: Notes payable
(2,700)
Net assets
HK$ 360

--- Page 1016 ---
The purpose of the Ting Division (cash-generating unit) is to develop
a nuclear-powered aircraft. If successful, traveling delays associated
with refueling could be substantially reduced. Many other benefits
would also occur. To date, management has not had much success and
is deciding whether a write-down at this time is appropriate.
Management estimated its future net cash flows from the project to
be HK$400 million. Management has also received an offer to
purchase the division for HK$335 million (fair value less costs to
sell). All identifiable assets’ and liabilities’ book and fair value
amounts are the same.
Instructions
a. Prepare the journal entry (if any) to record the impairment at
December 31, 2022.
b. At December 31, 2023, it is estimated that the division’s
recoverable amount increased to HK$345 million. Prepare the
journal entry (if any) to record this increase in fair value.
E12.16 (LO 5) (Accounting for R&D Costs) Margaret Avery
Company from time to time embarks on a research program when a
special project seems to offer possibilities. In 2021, the company
expends €325,000 on a research project, but by the end of 2021 it is
impossible to determine whether any benefit will be derived from it.
Instructions
a. What account should be charged for the €325,000, and how
should it be shown in the financial statements?
b. The project is completed in 2022, and a successful patent is
obtained. The development costs to complete the project are
€110,000 (€36,000 of these costs were incurred after achieving
economic viability). Additional administrative and legal expenses
incurred in obtaining patent number 472-1001-84 in 2022 total
€24,000. The patent has an expected useful life of 5 years. Record
these costs in journal entry form. Also, record patent
amortization (full year) in 2022.

--- Page 1017 ---
c. Additional engineering and consulting costs incurred in 2023
required to advance the design of a product to the manufacturing
stage total €60,000. These costs enhance the design of the
product considerably, but it is highly uncertain if there will be a
market for the new version of the product (it has not achieved
economic viability). Discuss the proper accounting treatment for
this cost.
E12.17 (LO 5) (Accounting for R&D Costs) Martinez Company
incurred the following costs during 2022 in connection with its
research and development activities.
Cost of equipment acquired that will have alternative uses
in future R&D projects over the next 5 years (uses straight-
line depreciation)
$330,000
Materials consumed in R&D projects
59,000
Consulting fees paid to outsiders for R&D projects
100,000
Personnel costs of persons involved in R&D projects
128,000
Indirect costs reasonably allocable to R&D projects
50,000
Materials purchased for future R&D projects
34,000
Instructions
Compute the amount to be reported as research and development
expense by Martinez on its income statement for 2022. Assume
equipment is purchased at the beginning of the year and economic
viability has not been achieved.
Problems
P12.1 (LO 2) 
 (Correct Intangible Assets Account)
Reichenbach Co., organized in 2021, has set up a single account for all
intangible assets. The following summary discloses the debit entries
that have been recorded during 2021 and 2022.
Intangible Assets
7/1/21 8-year franchise; expiration date 6/30/29
€ 48,000

--- Page 1018 ---
Intangible Assets
10/1/21 Advance payment on laboratory space (2-year
lease)
24,000
12/31/21 Net loss for 2021 including governmental
business fee, €1,000, and related legal fees of
organizing, €5,000 (all fees incurred in 2021)
16,000
1/2/22 Patent purchased (10-year life)
84,000
3/1/22 Cost of developing a secret formula (indefinite
life)
75,000
4/1/22 Goodwill purchased (indefinite life)
278,400
6/1/22 Legal fee for successful defense of patent
purchased above
12,650
9/1/22 Research and development costs (development
costs of €45,000 incurred related to 1/2/22
patent, which has achieved economic viability)
160,000
Instructions
Prepare the necessary entries to clear the Intangible Assets account
and to set up separate accounts for distinct types of intangibles. Make
the entries as of December 31, 2022, recording any necessary
amortization and reflecting all balances accurately as of that date.
(Ignore income tax effects.)
P12.2 (LO 2) (Accounting for Patents) Choo Laboratories holds a
valuable patent (No. 758-6002-1A) on a precipitator that prevents
certain types of air pollution. Choo does not manufacture or sell the
products and processes it develops. Instead, it conducts research and
develops products and processes which it patents, and then assigns
the patents to manufacturers on a royalty basis. Occasionally, it sells a
patent. The history of Choo’s patent number 758-6002-1A is as
follows.
Date
Activity
Cost
2013–
2014
Research conducted to develop precipitator
HK$384,000

--- Page 1019 ---
Jan.
2015
Design and construction of a prototype
87,600
Mar.
2015
Testing of models
42,000
Jan.
2016
Fees paid engineers and lawyers to prepare
patent application; patent granted June 30, 2016
59,500
Nov.
2017
Engineering activity necessary to advance the
design of the precipitator to the manufacturing
stage
81,500
Dec.
2018
Legal fees paid to successfully defend
precipitator patent
42,000
Apr.
2019
Development costs aimed at modifying the
design of the patented precipitator
49,000
July
2021
Legal fees paid in unsuccessful patent
infringement suit against a competitor
34,000
Based on execution of a royalty contract in March 2019, the patent is
deemed to be economically viable. Choo assumed a useful life of 17
years when it received the initial precipitator patent. On January 1,
2021, it revised its useful life estimate downward to 5 remaining
years. Amortization is computed for a full year if the cost is incurred
prior to July 1, and no amortization is computed for the year if the
cost is incurred after June 30. The company’s year ends December 31.
Instructions
Compute the carrying value of patent No. 758-6002-1A on each of the
following dates:
a. December 31, 2016.
b. December 31, 2020.
c. December 31, 2023.
P12.3 (LO 2) (Accounting for Franchise, Patents, and
Trademark) Information concerning Sandro SA’s intangible assets is
as follows.

--- Page 1020 ---
1. On January 1, 2022, Sandro signed an agreement to operate as a
franchisee of Hsian Copy Service for an initial franchise fee of
R$75,000. Of this amount, R$15,000 was paid when the
agreement was signed, and the balance is payable in annual
payments of R$15,000 each, beginning January 1, 2023. The
agreement provides that the down payment is not refundable and
no future services are required of the franchisor. The present
value at January 1, 2022, of the four annual payments discounted
at 14% (the implicit rate for a loan of this type) is R$43,700. The
agreement also provides that 5% of the revenue from the
franchise must be paid to the franchisor annually. Sandro’s
revenue from the franchise for 2022 was R$900,000. Sandro
estimates the useful life of the franchise to be 10 years. (Hint:
You may want to refer to Chapter 18 to determine the proper
accounting treatment for the franchise fee and payments.)
2. Sandro incurred R$65,000 of experimental and development
costs in its laboratory to develop a patent that was granted on
January 2, 2022. Legal fees and other costs associated with
registration of the patent totaled R$17,600. Sandro estimates that
the useful life of the patent will be 8 years. The patent has yet to
achieve economic viability.
3. A trademark was purchased from Shanghai Company for
R$36,000 on July 1, 2019. Expenditures for successful litigation
in defense of the trademark totaling R$10,200 were paid on July
1, 2022. Sandro estimates that the useful life of the trademark
will be 20 years from the date of acquisition.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule showing the intangible assets section of
Sandro’s statement of financial position at December 31, 2022.
Show supporting computations in good form.
b. Prepare a schedule showing all expenses resulting from the
transactions that would appear on Sandro’s income statement for
the year ended December 31, 2022. Show supporting
computations in good form.

--- Page 1021 ---
P12.4 (LO 5) 
 (Accounting for R&D Costs) During
2020, Robin Wright Tool Company purchased a building site for its
proposed research and development laboratory at a cost of $60,000.
Construction of the building was started in 2020. The building was
completed on December 31, 2021, at a cost of $320,000 and was
placed in service on January 2, 2022. The estimated useful life of the
building for depreciation purposes was 20 years. The straight-line
method of depreciation was to be employed, and there was no
estimated residual value.
Management estimates that about 50% of the projects of the research
and development group will result in long-term benefits (i.e., at least
10 years) to the company. The remaining projects either benefit the
current period or are abandoned before completion. A summary of the
number of projects and the direct costs incurred in conjunction with
the research and development activities for 2022 appears below.
Number
of
Projects
Salaries
and
Employee
Benefits
Other
Expenses
(Excluding
Building
Depreciation
Charges)
Completed projects with long-term
benefits (costs shown are
development costs incurred after
achieving economic viability)
15 $ 90,000
$50,000
Abandoned projects or projects that
benefit the current period
10
65,000
15,000
Projects in process—results
indeterminate
5
40,000
12,000
Total
30 $195,000
$77,000
Upon recommendation of the research and development group, Robin
Wright Tool Company acquired a patent for manufacturing rights at a
cost of $88,000. The patent was acquired on April 1, 2021, and has an
economic life of 10 years.

--- Page 1022 ---
Instructions
Under IFRS, how would the items above relating to research and
development activities be reported on the following financial
statements?
a. The company’s income statement for 2022.
b. The company’s statement of financial position as of December 31,
2022.
Be sure to give account titles and amounts, and briefly justify your
presentation.
P12.5 (LO 3, 4) (Goodwill, Impairment) On July 31, 2022,
Mexico Company paid $3,000,000 to acquire all of the ordinary
shares of Conchita Incorporated, which became a division (cash-
generating unit) of Mexico. Conchita reported the following statement
of financial position at the time of the acquisition.
Non-current
assets
$2,700,000 Equity
$2,400,000
Current assets
800,000 Non-current liabilities
500,000
Total assets
$3,500,000 Current liabilities
600,000
Total equity and
liabilities
$3,500,000
It was determined at the date of the purchase that the fair value of the
identifiable net assets of Conchita was $2,750,000. Over the next 6
months of operations, the newly purchased division experienced
operating losses. In addition, it now appears that it will generate
substantial losses for the foreseeable future. At December 31, 2022,
Conchita reports the following statement of financial position
information.
Current assets
$ 450,000
Non-current assets (including goodwill recognized in
purchase)
2,400,000

--- Page 1023 ---
Current liabilities
(700,000)
Non-current liabilities
(500,000)
Net assets
$1,650,000
It is determined that the recoverable amount of the Conchita Division
is $1,850,000.
Instructions
a. Compute the amount of goodwill recognized, if any, on July 31,
2022.
b. Determine the impairment loss, if any, to be recorded on
December 31, 2022.
c. Assume that the recoverable amount of the Conchita Division is
$1,600,000 instead of $1,850,000. Determine the impairment
loss, if any, to be recorded on December 31, 2022.
d. Prepare the journal entry to record the impairment loss, if any,
and indicate where the loss would be reported in the income
statement.
P12.6 (LO 2, 3, 4) (Comprehensive Intangible Assets) Montana
Matt’s Golf Ltd. was formed on July 1, 2021, when Matt Magilke
purchased the Old Master Golf Company. Old Master provides video
golf instruction at kiosks in shopping malls. Magilke plans to integrate
the instructional business into his golf equipment and accessory
stores. Magilke paid £770,000 cash for Old Master. At the time, Old
Master’s statement of financial position reported assets of £650,000
and liabilities of £200,000 (thus equity was £450,000). The fair value
of Old Master’s assets is estimated to be £800,000. Included in the
assets is the Old Master trade name with a fair value of £10,000 and a
copyright on some instructional books with a fair value of £24,000.
The trade name has a remaining life of 5 years and can be renewed at
nominal cost indefinitely. The copyright has a remaining life of 40
years.
Instructions

--- Page 1024 ---
a. Prepare the intangible assets section of Montana Matt’s at
December 31, 2021. How much amortization expense is included
in Montana Matt’s income for the year ended December 31, 2021?
Show all supporting computations.
b. Prepare the journal entry to record amortization expense for
2022. Prepare the intangible assets section of Montana Matt’s at
December 31, 2022. (No impairments are required to be recorded
in 2022.)
c. At the end of 2023, Magilke is evaluating the results of the
instructional business. Due to fierce competition from online and
television, the Old Master cash-generating unit has been losing
money. Its book value is now £500,000. The recoverable amount
of the Old Master reporting unit is £420,000. Magilke has
collected the following information related to the company’s
other intangible assets.
Intangible Asset Value-in-Use
Trade names
£ 3,000
Copyrights
25,000
Prepare the journal entries required, if any, to record impairments on
Montana Matt’s intangible assets. (Assume that any amortization for
2023 has been recorded.) Show supporting computations.
Concepts for Analysis
CA12.1 (LO 1, 5) 
 (Development Costs) Dogwood
Electronics has been working to develop a patented technology for
backing up computer hard drives. Dogwood had the following
activities related to this project.
March 1 Dogwood incurred €10,000 in legal and processing fees to
file and record a patent for the technology.
April 5 Laboratory and materials fees to identify a working system,
€23,000.
May 15 Prototype development and testing, €34,000.

--- Page 1025 ---
June 1 Dogwood meets the economic viability threshold upon
receiving a firm contract for the product.
June 30 Final development of product based on earlier tests,
€45,000.
Instructions
a. Prepare a schedule indicating Dogwood’s R&D costs to be
expensed and Dogwood’s R&D costs to be capitalized.
b. Briefly discuss how the accounting for these costs will impact the
information presented in Dogwood’s income statement and
statement of financial position. Discuss the effects in current and
future periods.
c. Identify the criteria for determining “economic viability.”
CA12.2 (LO 1, 2, 5) (Accounting for Pre-Opening Costs) After
securing lease commitments from several major stores, Auer
Shopping Center, Inc. was organized and built a shopping center in a
growing suburb.
The shopping center would have opened on schedule on January 1,
2022, if it had not been struck by a severe tornado in December.
Instead, it opened for business on October 1, 2022. All of the
additional construction costs that were incurred as a result of the
tornado were covered by insurance.
In July 2021, in anticipation of the scheduled January opening, a
permanent staff had been hired to promote the shopping center,
obtain tenants for the uncommitted space, and manage the property.
A summary of some of the costs incurred in 2021 and the first 9
months of 2022 follows.
2021
January 1, 2022
through 
September 30, 2022
Interest on mortgage bonds $720,000
$540,000

--- Page 1026 ---
Cost of obtaining tenants
300,000
360,000
Promotional advertising
540,000
557,000
The promotional advertising campaign was designed to familiarize
shoppers with the center. Had it been known in time that the center
would not open until October 2022, the 2021 expenditure for
promotional advertising would not have been made. The advertising
had to be repeated in 2022.
All of the tenants who had leased space in the shopping center at the
time of the tornado accepted the October occupancy date on condition
that the monthly rental charges for the first 9 months of 2022 be
canceled.
Instructions
Explain how each of the costs for 2021 and the first 9 months of 2022
should be treated in the accounts of the shopping center. Give the
reasons for each treatment.
CA12.3 (LO 1, 2) 
 (Accounting for Patents) On June 30,
2022, your client, Ferry plc, was granted two patents covering plastic
cartons that it had been producing and marketing profitably for the
past 3 years. One patent covers the manufacturing process, and the
other covers the related products.
Ferry’s executives tell you that these patents represent the most
significant breakthrough in the industry in the past 30 years. The
products have been marketed under the registered trademarks
Evertight, Duratainer, and Sealrite. Licenses under the patents have
already been granted by your client to other manufacturers around the
world and are producing substantial royalties.
On July 1, Ferry commenced patent infringement actions against
several companies whose names you recognize as those of substantial
and prominent competitors. Ferry’s management is optimistic that
these suits will result in a permanent injunction against the
manufacture and sale of the infringing products as well as collection
of damages for loss of profits caused by the alleged infringement.

--- Page 1027 ---
The financial vice president has suggested that the patents be
recorded at value-in-use, based on the discounted value of expected
net royalty receipts.
Instructions
a. What is the meaning of “discounted value of expected net
receipts”? Explain.
b. How would such a value be calculated for net royalty receipts?
c. What basis of valuation for Ferry’s patents would be used under
IFRS? Give supporting reasons for this basis.
d. Assuming no practical problems of implementation and ignoring
IFRS, what is the preferable basis of valuation for patents?
Explain.
e. What would be the preferable theoretical basis of amortization?
Explain.
f. What recognition, if any, should be made of the infringement
litigation in the financial statements for the year ending
September 30, 2022? Discuss.
CA12.4 (LO 5) 
 (Accounting for Research and
Development Costs) Cuevas Co. is in the process of developing a
revolutionary new product. A new division of the company was
formed to develop, manufacture, and market this new product. As of
year-end (December 31, 2022), the new product has not been
manufactured for resale (economic viability has not been achieved).
However, a prototype unit was built and is in operation.
Throughout 2022, the new division incurred certain costs. These costs
include design and engineering studies, prototype manufacturing
costs, administrative expenses (including salaries of administrative
personnel), and market research costs. In addition, approximately
€900,000 in equipment (with an estimated useful life of 10 years)
was purchased for use in developing and manufacturing the new
product. Approximately €315,000 of this equipment was built
specifically for the design development of the new product. The

--- Page 1028 ---
remaining €585,000 of equipment was used to manufacture the pre-
production prototype and will be used to manufacture the new
product once it is in commercial production.
Instructions
a. How are “research” and “development” defined in IFRS?
b. Briefly indicate the practical and conceptual reasons for the
conclusion reached by the IASB on accounting and reporting
practices for research and development costs.
c. In accordance with IFRS, how should the various costs of Cuevas
described above be recorded on the financial statements for the
year ended December 31, 2022?
d. Discuss the importance of economic viability as it relates to
research and development cost accounting.
CA12.5 (LO 5) 
 (Accounting for Research and
Development Costs) Czeslaw Corporation’s research and
development department has an idea for a project it believes will
culminate in a new product that would be very profitable for the
company. Because the project will be very expensive, the department
requests approval from the company’s controller, Jeff Reid.
Reid recognizes that company profits have been down lately and is
hesitant to approve a project that will incur significant expenses that
cannot be capitalized due to IFRS requirements. He knows that if
Czeslaw Corporation hires an outside firm to do the work and obtain a
patent for the process, Czeslaw can then purchase the patent from the
outside firm and record the expenditure as an asset. Reid knows that
the company’s own R&D department is first-rate, and he is confident
they can do the work well.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. Who are the stakeholders in this situation?
b. What are the ethical issues involved?

--- Page 1029 ---
c. What should Reid do?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Reporting Problem
Marks and Spencer plc (M&S)
The financial statements of M&S (GBR) are presented in Appendix A.
The company’s complete annual report, including the notes to the
financial statements, is available online.
Instructions
Refer to M&S’s financial statements and the accompanying notes to
answer the following questions.
a. Does M&S report any intangible assets and goodwill in its
financial statements and accompanying notes? Briefly explain.
b. How much selling and administrative expenses does M&S report
in 2018 and 2019? Briefly discuss the significance of these
expenses to M&S’s operating results.
Comparative Analysis Case
adidas and Puma
The financial statements of adidas (DEU) and Puma (DEU) are
presented in Appendices B and C, respectively. The complete annual
reports, including the notes to the financial statements, are available
online.
Instructions
Use the companies’ financial information to answer the following
questions.
a.  
1. What amounts for intangible assets were reported by adidas
and Puma in their respective statements of financial

--- Page 1030 ---
position?
2. What percentage of total assets is each of these reported
amounts?
3. What was the change in the amount of intangibles from 2017
to 2018 for adidas and Puma?
b.  
1. On what basis and over what periods of time did adidas and
Puma amortize their intangible assets?
2. What were the amounts of accumulated amortization
reported by adidas and Puma at the end of 2018 and 2017?
Did either company record impairments on intangible
assets? Explain.
3. What was the composition of the identifiable and
unidentifiable intangible assets reported by adidas and Puma
at the end of 2018?
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1: Merck and Johnson & Johnson
Merck & Co., Inc. (USA) and Johnson & Johnson (USA) are two
leading producers of healthcare products. Each has considerable
assets and each expends considerable funds each year toward the
development of new products. The development of a new healthcare
product is often very expensive and risky. New products frequently
must undergo considerable testing before approval for distribution to
the public. For example, it took Johnson & Johnson 4 years and $200
million to develop its 1-DAY ACUVUE contact lenses. The following
are some basic data compiled from the financial statements of these
two companies.
(all dollars in millions)
Johnson & Johnson Merck
Total assets
$53,317 $42,573
Total revenue
47,348
22,939

--- Page 1031 ---
Net income
8,509
5,813
Research and development expense
5,203
4,010
Intangible assets
11,842
2,765
Instructions
a. What kinds of intangible assets might a healthcare products
company have? Does the composition of these intangibles matter
to investors—that is, would investors perceive Merck differently if
all of its intangibles were goodwill, rather than if all of its
intangibles were patents?
b. Suppose the president of Merck has come to you for advice. He
has noted that by eliminating all research and development
expenditures, the company could have reported $4 billion more in
net income. He is frustrated because much of the research never
results in a product, or the products take years to develop. He
says shareholders are eager for higher returns, so he is
considering eliminating research and development expenditures
for at least a couple of years. What would you advise?
c. The notes to Merck’s financial statements state that Merck has
goodwill of $1.1 billion. Where does recorded goodwill come
from? Is it necessarily a good thing to have a lot of goodwill on a
company’s books?
Case 2: Analysis of Goodwill
As a new intern for the local branch office of a national brokerage
firm, you are excited to get an assignment that allows you to use your
accounting expertise. Your supervisor provides you with the
spreadsheet below, which contains data for the most recent quarter
for three companies that the firm has been recommending to its
clients as “buys.” All of the companies’ returns on assets have
outperformed their industry cohorts in the past, but given recent
challenges in their markets, there is concern that the companies may
experience operating challenges and lower earnings. (All numbers in
millions, except return on assets.)

--- Page 1032 ---
Instructions
a. The market value for each of these companies is lower than the
corresponding book value. What implications does this have for
each company’s future prospects?
b. To date, none of these companies has recorded goodwill
impairments. Your supervisor suspects that the companies will
need to record impairments in the near future, but he is unsure
about the goodwill impairment rules. Is it likely that these
companies will recognize impairments? Explain.
c. Using the above data, estimate the amount of goodwill
impairment for each company and prepare the journal entry to
record the impairment. For each company, you may assume that
the book value less the carrying value of the goodwill
approximates the fair value of the company’s net assets.
d. Discuss the effects of your entries in part (c) on your evaluation
of these companies based on the return on assets ratio.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
On January 2, 2022, Raconteur AG reported the following intangible
assets: (1) a copyright with a carrying value of €15,000, and (2) a trade
name with a carrying value of €8,500. The trade name has a
remaining life of 5 years and can be renewed at nominal cost
indefinitely. The copyright has a remaining life of 10 years.

--- Page 1033 ---
At December 31, 2022, Raconteur assessed the intangible assets for
possible impairment and developed the following information.
Estimated Undiscounted 
Expected Future Cash Flows
Estimated 
Recoverable Amount
Copyright
€20,000
€16,000
Trade name
10,000
5,000
Accounting
Prepare any journal entries required for Raconteur’s intangible assets
at December 31, 2022.
Analysis
Many securities analysts indicate a preference for less-volatile
operating income measures. Such measures make it easier to predict
future income and cash flows using reported income measures. How
does the accounting for impairments of intangible assets affect the
volatility of operating income?
Principles
Many accounting issues involve a trade-off between the primary
characteristics of relevance and faithful representation of information.
How does the accounting for intangible asset impairments reflect this
trade-off?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
2004), paras. 8–17.
[2] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
2004), paras. 48–67.

--- Page 1034 ---
[3] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
2004), par. 90.
[4] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
2004), paras. 75–87.
[5] International Financial Reporting Standard 3, Business
Combinations (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards
Committee Foundation, 2004), paras. IE16–IE44.
[6] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
April 2004), par. 20.
[7] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
2004), par. 100.
[8] International Financial Reporting Standard 3, Business
Combinations (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards
Committee Foundation, 2004), paras. 13 and BC157–BC158.
[9] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets (London,
U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation,
April 2004), par. 11.
[10] International Financial Reporting Standard 3, Business
Combinations (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards
Committee Foundation, 2004), par. BC328.
[11] International Financial Reporting Standard 3, Business
Combinations (London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards
Committee Foundation, 2004), paras. 34–36.
[12] International Accounting Standard 36, Impairment of Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2001).
[13] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee

--- Page 1035 ---
Foundation, April 2004), par. 17.
[14] International Accounting Standard 36, Impairment of Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2001), par. 124.
[15] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), par. 57.
[16] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), paras. 56–59.
[17] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), paras. 42–43.
[18] International Accounting SIC Interpretation 32, Intangible
Assets—Web Site Costs (London, U.K.: International Accounting
Standards Committee Foundation, 2002).
[19] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), par. 69.
[20] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), par. 69(a).
[21] International Accounting Standard 38, Intangible Assets
(London, U.K.: International Accounting Standards Committee
Foundation, 2004), par. 69(c).
Research Case
King Company is contemplating the purchase of a smaller company,
which is a distributor of King’s products. Top management of King is
convinced that the acquisition will result in significant synergies in its
selling and distribution functions. The financial management group
(of which you are a part) has been asked to analyze the effects of the
acquisition on the combined company’s financial statements. This is

--- Page 1036 ---
the first acquisition for King, and some of the senior staff insist that
based on their recollection of goodwill accounting, any goodwill
recorded on the acquisition will result in a “drag” on future earnings
for goodwill amortization. Other younger members on the staff argue
that goodwill accounting has changed. Your supervisor asks you to
research this issue.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may
register for free eIFRS access at this site). When you have accessed
the documents, use the search tool in your Internet browser to
respond to the following questions. (Provide paragraph citations.)
a. Identify the accounting literature that addresses goodwill and
other intangible assets.
b. Define goodwill.
c. Is goodwill subject to amortization? Explain.
d. When goodwill is recognized by an affiliated company, should it
be tested for impairment at the consolidated level or at the
affiliate level? Discuss.
Global Accounting Insights
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the accounting for intangible assets under IFRS and U.S.
GAAP.
There are some significant differences between IFRS and U.S. GAAP
in the accounting for both intangible assets and impairments. U.S.
GAAP related to intangible assets is presented in FASB literature
addressing goodwill and other intangible assets and business
combinations. The accounting for research and development, start-up
costs, and advertising costs is prescribed in separate parts of the FASB
literature.

--- Page 1037 ---
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP
and IFRS related to intangible assets.
Similarities
Like IFRS, under U.S. GAAP intangible assets (1) lack physical
substance and (2) are not financial instruments. In addition,
under IFRS an intangible asset is identifiable. To be identifiable,
an intangible asset must either be separable from the company
(can be sold or transferred) or it arises from a contractual or legal
right from which economic benefits will flow to the company.
Fair value is used as the measurement basis for intangible assets
under U.S. GAAP if it is more clearly evident.
With the issuance of a converged statement on business
combinations (IFRS 3 and SFAS No. 141—Revised), U.S. GAAP
and IFRS are very similar for intangibles acquired in a business
combination. That is, companies recognize an intangible asset
separately from goodwill if the intangible represents contractual
or legal rights or is capable of being separated or divided and sold,
transferred, licensed, rented, or exchanged. In addition, under
both IFRS and U.S. GAAP, companies recognize acquired in-
process research and development (IPR&D) as a separate
intangible asset if it meets the definition of an intangible asset
and its fair value can be measured reliably.
As in IFRS, U.S. GAAP assesses goodwill for impairment at least
annually, based on the fair value of the reporting unit.
As in IFRS, under U.S. GAAP the costs associated with research
and development are segregated into the two components. Costs
in the research phase are always expensed under both U.S. GAAP
and IFRS.
Differences
U.S. GAAP does not permit the revaluation basis of accounting.
While under IFRS revaluations are not permitted for goodwill,

--- Page 1038 ---
revaluation of other indefinite-life intangible assets are rare
because revaluations are not allowed unless there is an active
market for the intangible asset.
U.S. GAAP requires expensing of all costs associated with
internally generated intangibles. IFRS permits some
capitalization of internally generated intangible assets (e.g., brand
value) if it is probable there will be a future benefit and the
amount can be reliably measured.
Under IFRS, legal costs incurred to protect rights under a patent,
copyright, or trademark are expensed as incurred. Under U.S.
GAAP, a company may capitalize these costs if it is successful in
the legal proceedings.
Under U.S. GAAP, impairment loss is measured as the excess of
the carrying amount over the asset’s fair value. IFRS requires an
impairment test at each reporting date for long-lived assets and
intangibles, and records an impairment if the asset’s carrying
amount exceeds its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount
is the higher of the asset’s fair value less costs to sell and its
value-in-use. Value-in-use is the future cash flows to be derived
from the particular asset, discounted to present value.
U.S. GAAP gives companies the option to perform a qualitative
assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not (i.e., a
likelihood of more than 50 percent) that an indefinite-life
intangible asset (including goodwill) is impaired. If the
qualitative assessment indicates that the fair value of the
reporting unit is more likely than not to be greater than the
carrying value (i.e., the asset is not impaired), the company need
not continue with the fair value test.
Under U.S. GAAP, impairment losses cannot be reversed for
assets to be held and used; the impairment loss results in a new
cost basis for the asset. IFRS and U.S. GAAP are similar in the
accounting for impairments of assets held for disposal. IFRS
allows reversal of impairment losses when there has been a
change in economic conditions or in the expected use of limited-
life intangibles and indefinite-life intangibles other than goodwill.

--- Page 1039 ---
Under U.S. GAAP, all development costs are expensed as incurred.
Under IFRS, costs in the development phase of a research and
development project are capitalized once technological feasibility
(referred to as economic viability) is achieved.
About the Numbers
To illustrate the effect of differences in the accounting for brands,
consider the following disclosure by GlaxoSmithKline (GBR) in a
recent annual report. Note that GlaxoSmithKline would report lower
income by £1.3 billion if it accounted for its brands under U.S. GAAP.
Notes to the Financial Statements
Intangible assets (in part):
The following table sets out the IFRS to U.S. GAAP adjustments
required to the IFRS income statement for amortization of brands:
Income Statement
(£ million)
Amortisation charge under IFRS
(139)
Amortisation charge under U.S. GAAP
1,454
IFRS to U.S. GAAP adjustment
1,315
On the Horizon
The FASB and IASB are pursuing different paths in their review of the
accounting for intangible assets. The FASB recently issued an
Invitation to Comment, in which there is the potential to (1) include
the amortization of goodwill either as an option or as a requirement;
(2) possibly change the impairment testing done for goodwill; (3)
include, in the amount of goodwill, recognized customer-related
intangibles; (4) include non-compete agreements, which are currently
separately recognized; and (5) include additional disclosures related to
goodwill.
The IASB is preparing to issue a discussion paper also related to
goodwill. The IASB has expressed preliminary views that the

--- Page 1040 ---
amortization of goodwill will not be permitted; some relief to the
mandatory qualitative impairment test should be provided, but the
test itself will not be changed. In addition, separate recognition of
identifiable intangible assets should not be included in goodwill, and
better disclosures should be required. The net result of the work of
the two Boards is likely to create more differences between the two
sets of standards.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. All of the following are key similarities between U.S. GAAP and
IFRS with respect to accounting for intangible assets except:
a. for accounting purposes, costs associated with research and
development activities are segregated into the two components.
b. the accounting for intangibles acquired in a business
combination.
c. recovery of impairments on intangibles other than goodwill.
d. the accounting for impairments of assets held for disposal.
2. Research and development costs are:
a. expensed under U.S. GAAP.
b. expensed under IFRS.
c. expensed under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
d. None of the answer choices is correct.
3. Which of the following statements is correct?
a. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP permit revaluation of property, plant,
and equipment and intangible assets (except for goodwill).
b. U.S. GAAP permits capitalization of development costs.
c. IFRS requires capitalization of research and development costs
once economic viability is met.

--- Page 1041 ---
d. IFRS requires capitalization of development costs once economic
viability is met.
4. A loss on impairment of an intangible asset under U.S. GAAP is the
asset’s:
a. carrying amount less the expected future net cash flows.
b. carrying amount less its recoverable amount.
c. recoverable amount less the expected future net cash flows.
d. carrying value less its fair value.
5. Recovery of impairment is recognized under U.S. GAAP for all the
following except:
a. patent held for use.
b. trademark.
c. goodwill.
d. None of the answer choices is correct; impairment reversals are
not allowed under U.S. GAAP.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP12.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences
between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to the accounting for
intangible assets.
GAAP12.2 Sophia SpA, a cellular phone company based in Italy,
prepares its financial statements in accordance with IFRS. In 2022, it
reported average assets of €12,500 and net income €1,125. Included in
net income is amortization expense of €120. Under U.S. GAAP,
Sophia’s amortization expense would have been €325. Briefly discuss
how analysis of Sophia’s 2022 return on assets (and comparisons to a
company using U.S. GAAP) would be affected by differences in
intangible asset amortization between IFRS and U.S. GAAP.

--- Page 1042 ---
GAAP12.3 Briefly discuss the convergence efforts that are underway
in the area of intangible assets.
GAAP12.4 Presented below are recent data and accounting policy
notes for the goodwill of two international drug companies. Bayer
(DEU) prepares its statements in accordance with International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Merck (USA) prepares its
financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Related Information
Bayer
(€ millions)
Merck
($ millions)
Research and development expense
2,107
4,010
Amortization expense
0
0
Net income
1,361
4,459
Accumulated goodwill amortization
0
0
Shareholders’ equity
15,532
44,676
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS do not allow amortization of goodwill.
Instructions
a. Compute the return on equity for each of these companies, and
use this analysis to briefly discuss the relative profitability of the
two companies.
b. IFRS requires that development costs must be capitalized if
technical and commercial feasibility (economic viability) of the
resulting product has been established. Assume that Bayer
recorded €1 million of development costs in the year reported
above. Discuss briefly how this accounting affects your ability to
compare the financial results of Bayer and Merck.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. a 3. d 4. d 5. d
Notes

--- Page 1043 ---
1 The accounting in this section relates to the acquisition of a single
asset or group of assets. The accounting for intangible assets
acquired in a business combination (transaction in which the
purchaser obtains control of one or more businesses) is discussed
later in this chapter.
2 IFRS also prohibits recognition of intangible assets such as
internally generated brands, mastheads, and customer lists. These
expenditures are similar to other costs to develop the business as
whole; therefore, they do not meet the identifiable criterion. [2]
3 For limited-life intangibles, the impairment test is performed only if
there is indication of impairment. However, the impairment test
for indefinite-life intangibles must be conducted annually. This
more stringent test is required because indefinite-life intangibles
are not amortized, and the recognized amounts may be subject to
significant judgment.
4 Similar to long-lived tangible assets, companies may revalue certain
types of intangible assets subsequent to acquisition. The
revaluation model can only be used for intangible assets that trade
in active markets (e.g., taxi licenses or similar contracts). [4] This
constraint, as well as the cost to perform the annual revaluation
process, explains the limited use of the revaluation option for
intangible assets. See I. von Keitz and KPMG IFRG Limited, The
Application of IFRS: Choices in Practice (December 2006), p. 11.
5 The legal life of trade names or trademarks may vary across
countries. However, over 70 countries, including members of the
European Union (EU), Australia, and the United States, are party to
the Madrid Protocol, which recognizes the trade names and
trademarks registered in other member countries (see
www.ipo.gov.uk/).
6 As with trademarks and trade names, the legal life of a copyright
may vary across countries. However, the United Kingdom, the
countries of the European Union, and the United States all have the
same copyright length.

--- Page 1044 ---
7 While patent lives may vary across countries, the term of protection
under most modern patent laws is 20 years from the filing date of
the application. Over 140 countries are party to the Patent
Cooperation Treaty (PCT), which was ratified in 1970 and most
recently amended in 2001. The PCT makes it possible to seek
patent protection for an invention simultaneously in each of a large
number of countries by filing an “international” patent application
(see www.wipo.int/patentscope/en/patents/).
8 Consider the opposite result: Sir Alexander Fleming, who discovered
penicillin, decided not to use a patent to protect his discovery. He
hoped that companies would produce it more quickly to help save
sufferers. Companies, however, refused to develop it because they
did not have the patent shield and, therefore, were afraid to make
the investment.
9 Companies may compute amortization using the activity method in
a manner similar to that described for depreciation on property,
plant, and equipment.
10 IFRS provides detailed guidance regarding the recognition of
identifiable intangible assets in a business combination. With this
guidance, the IASB expected that companies would recognize more
identifiable intangible assets, and less goodwill, in the financial
statements as a result of business combinations. [8] Under IFRS,
because goodwill does not meet the identifiability criterion, it is not
an intangible asset. [9] Nonetheless we present the accounting for
goodwill here because goodwill commonly arises in combination
with other intangible assets.
11 The IASB expressed concern about measuring goodwill as a residual
but noted that there is no real measurement alternative since
goodwill is not separable from the company as a whole. [10]
12 P. Kowsmann and P. Davies, “Deutsche Bank-Commerzbank Deal
Might Rest on Mountain of ‘Badwill’,” Wall Street Journal (April
14, 2019).

--- Page 1045 ---
13 As with impairments of property, plant, and equipment, the
amount of the recovery of the loss is limited to the carrying value
amount that would result if the impairment had not occurred. [13]
14 Note that the impairment test is performed every year (not only
when there is an impairment indicator). This more stringent
impairment model for indefinite-life intangibles (and goodwill) is
used because these assets are not amortized and the recognized
amounts may be subject to significant judgment.
15 Because there is rarely a market for cash-generating units,
estimation of the recoverable amount for goodwill impairments is
usually based on value-in-use estimates.
16 In the Kohlbuy case, the entire impairment loss is allocated to
goodwill. If the impairment loss exceeds the carrying value of the
goodwill, Kohlbuy allocates the impairment loss to the goodwill
and other assets as follows: (1) reduce the goodwill to zero and (2)
allocate any remaining impairment loss to the other assets on the
basis of their relative carrying amounts. In this case, Kohlbuy
follows the impairment guidelines for long-lived assets, as
discussed in Chapter 11. If these assets are evaluated for
impairment on an individual basis, impairment losses may have
been recorded on these assets as part of that process. Alternatively,
the Kohlbuy example could represent a situation in which the other
assets are evaluated at the cash-generating-unit level. These
procedures are complex and beyond the scope of this textbook.
17 All of the following criteria must be met to begin capitalizing
development costs into the carrying value of the related intangible:
(1) the project achieves technical feasibility of completing the
intangible asset so that it will be available for use or sale; (2) the
company intends, and has the ability, to complete the intangible
asset and use or sell it; (3) the intangible asset will generate
probable future economic benefits (there is a market for the asset
or the output of the asset); (4) the company has adequate technical,
financial, and other resources to complete the development of the
intangible asset; and (5) the company can measure reliably the

--- Page 1046 ---
development costs associated with the intangible asset to be
developed. [15]
18 If R&D-related intangibles (often referred to as in-process R&D)
are acquired in a business combination, they are also recognized
and measured at fair value. After initial recognition, these
intangible assets are accounted for in accordance with their nature
(as either limited-life or indefinite-life intangibles). [17]
19 With the growth in online selling activities, internally developed
websites represent a significant source of internally generated
intangible assets. IFRS has specific criteria for determining
whether the development costs associated with websites meet
capitalization thresholds. In essence, these criteria assess whether
the website is economically viable in generating sales for the
company. [18]
20 A company is considered to be in the developing stages when it is
directing its efforts toward establishing a new business and either
the company has not started the principal operations or it has
earned no significant revenue.
Sources: E. Roston, “Non-Financial Data Are Material: The Sustainability Paradox,”
www.bloombergnews.com (April 13, 2012); R. Eccles, “What the World Needs Now:
Sustainability Accounting Standards,” Forbes (May 4, 2016); Trends in External Assurance
of Sustainability Reports: Update on the U.S. Global Reporting Initiative (July 2014); and
J. Hales, “The Future of Accounting Is Now: Financial Performance Is Linked to
Sustainable Growth,” CPA Journal (July 2018).

--- Page 1047 ---
