CHAPTER 8
Valuation of Inventories: A Cost-Basis Approach
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe inventory classifications and different inventory systems.
2. Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
3. Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for inventories.
4. Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial statements.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that
are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 8
As the following opening story indicates, the issues related to accounting
and reporting for inventory are complex. Inappropriate recognition and
measurement of inventory leads to misstatements of key measures of
financial performance. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows. (Note that Global Accounting Insights related to inventory is
presented in Chapter 9.)
It Should Be Easy, but It Isn’t!
The accounting for inventory should be straightforward. You simply determine
the cost of the inventory and carry this amount forward until the goods are
sold. Unfortunately, the devil is in the details. Questions about whether costs

--- Page 624 ---
should be inventoried or expensed are sometimes difficult to answer. And in
some cases, it is even difficult to determine whether inventory has really been
sold. The following are some situations that may test your accounting
knowledge.
Case 1
Chocola Company, a manufacturer of chocolate bars, has a sales promotion
in which customers receive a free chocolate bar for each bar purchased—a
two-for-one special. The sales price of a chocolate bar is €3, and the cost to
produce one bar is €1.
Question: When a chocolate bar is sold to a customer, what is the
inventory cost that should be assigned to that product? Is it €2 in
inventory cost or is it €1 of inventory cost and €1 of selling
expense?
Case 2
Wellness Pharmacy offers manufacturers more attractive product
placement in its stores, for a defined period of time, if they pay a fixed fee
(which is generally independent of the volume of goods sold) for this
upgraded space. These fees are often referred to as slotting fees.
Question: Should Wellness Pharmacy report these slotting fees as
revenue when received, or should these fees reduce the cost of
goods sold of the merchandise?
Case 3
Digital Age, an electronics retailer, purchases computers from a
manufacturer and stores them in warehouses before delivery to its various
retail stores. Digital Age then transfers these computers between internal
warehouses and retail stores, incurring transportation costs.
Question: How should Digital Age account for the transportation
costs both between different internal warehouses and from the
internal warehouses to its retail stores?
Here are the solutions to these questions.
Case 1: The purchase cost of the free chocolate bar is a component of
inventory cost and should be reported as cost of goods sold at the time a
chocolate bar is sold. The cost of goods sold is therefore €2, not €1.
Chocola Company should not charge the free bar to selling expense, as
gross profit will be misstated.

--- Page 625 ---
Case 2: Wellness Pharmacy should record the slotting fees as a reduction
of cost of goods sold (and therefore a reduction in inventory value). To
recognize the fee revenue immediately is premature as Wellness
Pharmacy has a performance obligation to provide space for a given period
of time. The fee received is best associated with the inventory sold over the
period of time allocated to the manufacturer.
Case 3: Intermediate transportation costs between different internal
warehouses and to the retail stores should be included in the cost of
inventory. These costs represent an unavoidable part of the supply chain
in getting inventory to the first point of sale.
As indicated, the issues involving inventory are sometimes difficult and
complex. Finding the appropriate answer is important because inventory is
often the largest current asset on a company’s statement of financial position.
Failure to record inventory correctly leads to misstatements of key measures of
financial performance, such as gross profit and net income.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a
targeted summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-
choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises
and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Inventory Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe inventory classifications and different inventory systems.
Classification
Inventories are asset items that a company holds for sale in the ordinary
course of business, or goods that it will use or consume in the production of
goods to be sold. The description and measurement of inventory require
careful attention. The investment in inventories is frequently the largest
current asset of merchandising (retail) and manufacturing businesses.
A merchandising concern, such as Carrefour (FRA), usually purchases its
merchandise in a form ready for sale. It reports the cost assigned to unsold

--- Page 626 ---
units left on hand as merchandise inventory. Only one inventory account,
Inventory, appears in the financial statements.
Manufacturing concerns, on the other hand, produce goods to sell to
merchandising firms. Many of the largest businesses are manufacturers, such
as China Petroleum & Chemical Corp. (CHN), Nissan (JPN), Royal
Dutch Shell (NLD), Procter & Gamble (USA), George Weston Ltd.
(CAN), and Nokia (FIN). Although the products they produce may differ,
manufacturers normally have three inventory accounts—Raw Materials, Work
in Process, and Finished Goods.
A company reports the cost assigned to goods and materials on hand but not
yet placed into production as raw materials inventory. Raw materials
include the wood to make a baseball bat or the steel to make a car. These
materials can be traced directly to the end product.
At any point in a continuous production process, some units are only partially
processed. The cost of the raw material for these unfinished units, plus the
direct labor cost applied specifically to this material and a ratable share of
manufacturing overhead costs, constitute the work in process inventory.
Companies report the costs identified with the completed but unsold units on
hand at the end of the fiscal period as finished goods inventory.
Illustration 8.1 contrasts the financial statement presentation of inventories
of Carrefour (FRA) (a merchandising company) with those of Nissan (JPN)
(a manufacturing company). The remainder of the statement of financial
position is essentially similar for the two types of companies.

--- Page 627 ---
Merchandising Company
Carrefour
Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet)
Current assets (in millions)
Inventories
€ 3,168
Trade receivables
4,856
Contract assets
1,875
Prepaid expenses and accrued income
1,024
Current income tax assets
227
Other financial assets
243
Current financial assets
612
Cash and cash equivalents
6,261
Total current assets
€18,266
Manufacturing Company
Nissan
Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet) March 31, 2019
Current assets (in millions)
Cash on hand and in banks
¥ 1,219,588
Trade notes and accounts receivable
512,164
Sales finance receivables
7,665,603
Securities
139,470
Merchandise and finished goods
827,289
Work in process
64,386
Raw materials and supplies
366,248
Other
945,449

--- Page 628 ---
Manufacturing Company
Allowance for doubtful accounts
(127,092)
Total current assets
¥11,613,105
ILLUSTRATION 8.1 Comparison of Presentation of Current Assets
for Merchandising and Manufacturing Companies
A manufacturing company, such as Nissan, also might include a
Manufacturing or Factory Supplies Inventory account. In it, Nissan would
include such items as machine oils, screws, welding supplies, and the like—
supplies that are used in production but are not the primary materials being
processed.
Illustration 8.2 shows the differences in the flow of costs through a
merchandising company and a manufacturing company.

--- Page 629 ---
ILLUSTRATION 8.2 Flow of Costs through Manufacturing and
Merchandising Companies
Inventory Cost Flow
Companies that sell or produce goods report inventory and cost of goods sold
at the end of each accounting period. The flow of costs for a company is as
follows. Beginning inventory plus the cost of goods purchased is the cost of
goods available for sale. As goods are sold, they are assigned to cost of goods
sold. Those goods that are not sold by the end of the accounting period
represent ending inventory. Illustration 8.3 shows these relationships.

--- Page 630 ---
ILLUSTRATION 8.3 Inventory Cost Flow
Companies use one of two types of systems for maintaining accurate inventory
records for these costs—the perpetual system or the periodic system.
Perpetual System
A perpetual inventory system continuously tracks changes in the Inventory
account. That is, a company records all purchases and sales (issues) of goods
directly in the Inventory account as they occur. The accounting features of a
perpetual inventory system are as follows.
1. Purchases of merchandise for resale or raw materials for production are
debited to Inventory rather than to Purchases.
2. Freight-in is debited to Inventory, not Purchases. Purchase returns and
allowances and purchase discounts are credited to Inventory rather than to
separate accounts.
3. Cost of goods sold is recorded at the time of each sale by debiting Cost of
Goods Sold and crediting Inventory.
4. A subsidiary ledger of individual inventory records is maintained as a
control measure. The subsidiary records show the quantity and cost of
each type of inventory on hand.
The perpetual inventory system provides a continuous record of the balances
in both the Inventory account and the Cost of Goods Sold account.
Periodic System

--- Page 631 ---
Under a periodic inventory system, a company determines the quantity of
inventory on hand only periodically, as the name implies. It records all
acquisitions of inventory during the accounting period by debiting the
Purchases account. A company then adds the total in the Purchases account at
the end of the accounting period to the cost of the inventory on hand at the
beginning of the period. This sum determines the total cost of the goods
available for sale during the period.
To compute the cost of goods sold, the company then subtracts the ending
inventory from the cost of goods available for sale. Note that under a
periodic inventory system, the cost of goods sold is a residual
amount that depends on a physical count of ending inventory. This
process is referred to as “taking a physical inventory.” Companies that use the
periodic system take a physical inventory at least once a year.
Comparing Perpetual and Periodic Systems
To illustrate the difference between a perpetual and a periodic system, assume
that Fesmire Company had the following transactions during the current year.
Beginning inventory 100 units at $6 = $ 600
Purchases
900 units at $6 = $5,400
Sales
600 units at $12 = $7,200
Ending inventory
400 units at $6 = $2,400
Fesmire records these transactions during the current year as shown in
Illustration 8.4.

--- Page 632 ---
ILLUSTRATION 8.4 Comparative Entries—Perpetual vs. Periodic
When a company uses a perpetual inventory system and a difference exists
between the perpetual inventory balance and the physical inventory count, it
needs a separate entry to adjust the perpetual inventory account. To illustrate,
assume that at the end of the reporting period, the perpetual inventory account
reported an inventory balance of $4,000. However, a physical count indicates
inventory of $3,800 is actually on hand. The entry to record the necessary
write-down is as follows.
Inventory Over and Short 200
Inventory
200
Perpetual inventory overages and shortages generally represent a
misstatement of cost of goods sold. The difference results from normal and
expected shrinkage, breakage, shoplifting, incorrect recordkeeping, and the
like. Inventory Over and Short therefore adjusts Cost of Goods Sold. In
practice, companies sometimes report Inventory Over and Short in the “Other
income and expense” section of the income statement.
Note that a company using the periodic inventory system does not report the
account Inventory Over and Short. The reason: The periodic method does not
have accounting records against which to compare the physical count. As a

--- Page 633 ---
result, a company buries inventory overages and shortages in cost of goods
sold.
Inventory Control
For various reasons, management is vitally interested in inventory planning
and control. Whether a company manufactures or merchandises goods, it
needs an accurate accounting system with up-to-date records. It may lose sales
and customers if it does not stock products in the desired style, quality, and
quantity. Further, companies must monitor inventory levels carefully to limit
the financing costs of carrying large amounts of inventory.
In a perfect world, companies would like a continuous record of both their
inventory levels and their cost of goods sold. The popularity and affordability of
accounting software make the perpetual system cost-effective for many kinds
of businesses. Companies like Loblaw Companies Ltd. (CAN),
Woolworths Ltd. (AUS), and J. Sainsbury (GBR) now incorporate the
recording of sales with optical scanners at the cash register into perpetual
inventory systems.
However, for many companies a complete perpetual system is not cost-
effective. But, most of these companies need current information regarding
their inventory levels, to protect against stockouts or overpurchasing and to aid
in preparation of monthly or quarterly financial data. As a result, these
companies use a modified perpetual inventory system. This system
provides detailed inventory records of increases and decreases in quantities
only—not currency amounts. It is merely a memorandum device outside the
double-entry system, which helps in determining the level of inventory at any
point in time.
Whether a company maintains a complete perpetual inventory in quantities
and currency amounts or a modified perpetual inventory system, it probably
takes a physical inventory once a year. No matter what type of inventory
records companies use, they all face the danger of loss and error. Waste,
breakage, theft, improper entry, failure to prepare or record requisitions, and
other similar possibilities may cause the inventory records to differ from the
actual inventory on hand. Thus, all companies need periodic verification of
the inventory records by actual count, weight, or measurement, with the
counts compared with the detailed inventory records. As indicated earlier, a
company corrects the records to agree with the quantities actually on hand.
If possible, companies should take the physical inventory near the end of their
fiscal year, to properly report inventory quantities in their annual accounting
reports. Because this is not always feasible, physical inventories taken within

--- Page 634 ---
two or three months of the year’s end are satisfactory if a company maintains
detailed inventory records with a fair degree of accuracy.1
Determining Cost of Goods Sold
Goods sold (or used) during an accounting period seldom correspond exactly to
the goods bought (or produced) during that period. As a result, inventories
either increase or decrease during the period. Companies must then allocate
the cost of all the goods available for sale (or use) between the goods that were
sold or used and those that are still on hand. The cost of goods available for
sale or use is the sum of (1) the cost of the goods on hand at the beginning of
the period, and (2) the cost of the goods acquired or produced during the
period. The cost of goods sold is the difference between (1) the cost of
goods available for sale during the period, and (2) the cost of goods on hand at
the end of the period. Illustration 8.5 shows these calculations.
Beginning inventory, Jan. 1
$100,000
Cost of goods acquired or produced during the year
800,000
Total cost of goods available for sale
900,000
Ending inventory, Dec. 31
(200,000)
Cost of goods sold during the year
$700,000
ILLUSTRATION 8.5 Computation of Cost of Goods Sold

--- Page 635 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Staying Lean
When you drop by a Walmart (USA) store, you are witnessing one of
history’s greatest logistical and operational successes. As one article noted,
the retail giant stocks products in more than 70 countries and at any given
time operates more than 11,000 stores in 27 countries around the world. It
manages an average of $32 billion in inventory.
With these kinds of numbers, having an effective and efficient supply chain
management system and a sound internal control system is imperative. For
example, Walmart uses its buying power in the supply chain to purchase an
increasing proportion of its goods directly from manufacturers and on a
combined basis across geographic borders. Walmart estimates that it saves
5–15% in costs across its supply chain by implementing direct purchasing
on a combined basis for the 15 countries in which it operates. Thus,
Walmart has a good handle on what products it needs to stock, and it gets
the best prices when it purchases.
Walmart also provides a classic example of the use of tight inventory
controls. Department managers use a scanner that when placed over the
bar code corresponding to a particular item, will tell them how many of the
items the store sold yesterday, last week, and over the same period last
year. It will tell them how many of those items are in stock, how many are
on the way, and how many the neighboring Walmart stores are carrying (in
case one store runs out). Walmart’s inventory management practices have
helped it become one of the top-ranked companies in terms of sales.
Sources: J. Birchall, “Walmart Aims to Cut Supply Chain Cost,” Financial Times (January 4,
2010); www.tradegecko.com/blog/incredibly-successful-supply-chain-management-walmart;
and K. Nash, “Wal-Mart Builds Supply Chain to Meet E-Commerce Demands,” Wall Street
Journal (May 7, 2015).
Goods and Costs Included in Inventory
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
Goods Included in Inventory

--- Page 636 ---
A company recognizes inventory and accounts payable at the time it controls
the asset. For example, when Lee Ltd. purchases Apple (USA) watches for
resale, Lee records these watches as inventory at the time control passes to
Lee. Control is therefore the key factor in determining when purchases and
sales of a product are recognized.
The IASB indicates that Lee controls the Apple watches when it has the ability
to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all the benefits from, these
watches. Control also includes Lee’s ability to prevent other companies from
directing the use of or receiving the benefits from these watches. As noted in
Chapter 7 in the Lululemon (CAN) example, companies then look to various
indicators to determine whether control has passed.2
One of these indicators, passage of title, is often used to determine control
because the rights and obligations are established legally. For example, when
Lee purchases the Apple watches, legal title belongs to Lee until the watches
are sold to customers. However in some limited cases, other indicators must be
considered because legal title and passage of control do not match.
Goods in Transit
Often, a company such as LG Electronics (KOR) purchases merchandise that
remains in transit—not yet received—at the end of a fiscal period. The
accounting for these shipped goods depends on who controls the merchandise.
In these situations, companies generally determine control based on who has
legal title to the goods by applying the “passage of title” rule. If a supplier ships
goods to LG f.o.b. shipping point, title passes to LG when the supplier
delivers the goods to the common carrier, which acts as an agent for LG (the
abbreviation f.o.b. stands for free on board). If the supplier ships the goods
f.o.b. destination, title passes to LG only when it receives the goods from the
common carrier. “Shipping point” and “destination” are often designated by a
particular location, for example, f.o.b. Seoul.
When LG obtains legal title to goods, it must record them as purchases in that
fiscal period, assuming a periodic inventory system. Thus, goods shipped to LG
f.o.b. shipping point, but in transit at the end of the period, belong to LG. It
should show the purchase in its records because legal title to these goods
passed to LG upon shipment of the goods. To disregard such purchases results
in understating inventories and accounts payable in the statement of financial
position, and understating purchases and ending inventories in the income
statement.
Consigned Goods

--- Page 637 ---
Companies market certain products through consignment. Under this
arrangement, a company like Williams Art Gallery (the consignor) ships
various art merchandise to Sotheby’s Holdings (USA) (the consignee), who
acts as Williams’ agent in selling the consigned goods. Sotheby’s agrees to
accept the goods without any liability, except to exercise due care and
reasonable protection from loss or damage, until it sells the goods to a third
party. When Sotheby’s sells the goods, it remits the revenue, less a selling
commission and expenses incurred in accomplishing the sale, to Williams.
Goods out on consignment remain the property of the consignor (Williams in
the example above). Although Sotheby’s has physical possession of the goods,
it does not have control because legal title and the risks and rewards of
ownership remain with Williams. Williams thus includes the goods in its
inventory at purchase price or production cost. Occasionally, and only for a
significant amount, the consignor shows the inventory out on consignment as
a separate item. Sometimes a consignor reports the inventory on consignment
in the notes to the financial statements. For example, Eagle Clothes, Inc.
(USA) reported the following related to consigned goods: “Inventories consist
of finished goods shipped on consignment to customers of the Company’s
subsidiary April-Marcus, Inc.”
The consignee makes no entry to the inventory account for goods received.
Remember, these goods remain the property of the consignor until sold. In
fact, the consignee should be extremely careful not to include any of the goods
consigned as a part of inventory. Additional discussion related to consignments
is provided in Chapter 18.
Special Sales Agreements
As we indicated earlier, transfer of legal title is the general guideline used to
determine whether a company should include an item in inventory.
Unfortunately, transfer of legal title and the underlying substance of the
transaction sometimes do not match. For example, legal title may have passed
to the purchaser, but the seller of the goods retains control of the inventory.
Two special sales situations are illustrated here to indicate the types of
problems companies encounter in practice:
1. Sales with repurchase agreement.
2. Sales with high rates of return.
Sales with Repurchase Agreement

--- Page 638 ---
Sometimes a company finances its inventory without reporting either a liability
or the inventory on its statement of financial position. This approach, often
referred to as a repurchase (or product financing) agreement, usually involves
a transfer (sale) with either an implicit or explicit repurchase agreement.
To illustrate, Hill Enterprises transfers (“sells”) inventory to Chase plc. and
simultaneously agrees to repurchase this merchandise at a specified price over
a specified period of time. Chase then uses the inventory as collateral and
borrows against it. Chase uses the loan proceeds to pay Hill, which repurchases
the inventory in the future. Chase employs the proceeds from repayment to
meet its loan obligation.
The essence of this transaction is that Hill is financing its inventory—and
retaining control—even though it transferred to Chase technical legal title to
the merchandise. By structuring a transaction in this manner, Hill may avoid
personal property taxes in certain jurisdictions. Other advantages of this
transaction for Hill are the removal of the current liability from its statement
of financial position and the ability to manipulate income. For Chase, the
purchase of the goods may solve an inventory liquidation problem (discussed
later), or Chase may enter into a similar reciprocal agreement at a later date.
These arrangements are often described in practice as “parking
transactions” (see Underlying Concepts). In this situation, Hill simply
parks the inventory on Chase’s statement of financial position for a short
period of time. Generally, when a repurchase agreement exists, Hill should
report the inventory and related liability on its books. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) The
reason? Hill has retained control of the asset; that is, Hill still owns the asset.
Underlying Concepts
Recognizing revenue at the time the inventory is “parked” violates the
revenue recognition principle. That is, a performance obligation is not met
because control has not been transferred to the buyer.
Sales with High Rates of Return
In industries such as publishing, music, toys, and sporting goods, formal or
informal agreements often exist that permit purchasers to return inventory for
a full or partial refund.
To illustrate, Quality Publishing Company sells textbooks to Campus
Bookstores with an agreement that Campus may return for full credit any

--- Page 639 ---
books not sold. Historically, Campus Bookstores returned approximately 25
percent of the textbooks from Quality Publishing. How should Quality
Publishing report its sales transactions?
The key question to determine whether a sale occurs is: Has Quality Publishing
transferred control of these goods to Campus Bookstore? Because Campus
Bookstore now has the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all
the benefits from these textbooks, these transactions are normally recorded as
a sale by Quality Publishing. In addition, the normal indicators for transfer of
control, such as passage of legal title, loss of physical control, and transfer of
risks and rewards of ownership, appear to have occurred. However, Quality
Publishing must also recognize that only partial control has transferred to
Campus Bookstore. Therefore, Quality Publishing does the following.
1. Record sales revenue at the amount it expects to receive from the
transaction. This transaction involves variable consideration and
therefore the transaction price is adjusted to recognize that a portion of
these textbooks will be returned.
2. Establish an estimated inventory return account to recognize
that some of its textbooks will be returned. The reason for recording
estimated inventory is that control over a significant number of the
textbooks has not passed to Campus Bookstore.
In other words, control does pass from seller to buyer for a majority of the
textbooks but not all of them. Quality Publishing therefore records an
estimated inventory return amount to recognize that fact. If returns are
unpredictable and uncertain, Quality Publishing should not consider the
textbooks sold and should not remove the goods from its inventory. This
example illustrates the difficulty of determining when control has passed in
situations where substantial returns are involved. [2] We provide expanded
discussion of special sales agreements and returns in Chapter 18.

--- Page 640 ---
What Do the Numbers Mean?
A Retail Apocalypse!
As the size and scope of ecommerce businesses such as Amazon.com
(USA) and Alibaba (CHN) continue to expand, traditional retailers with
brick-and-mortar stores are struggling to keep up and, in some cases, to
remain in business.
The most common response is to adopt an omnichannel approach. An
omnichannel retailer provides multiple customer pathways that include
online and mobile phone, as well as physical opportunities to learn about
products, compare them, and eventually make a purchase. For example, an
omnichannel merchant can allow a customer to comparison-shop via its
website, to order the product on his or her phone, and then to pick up the
merchandise in the store that same day.
The movement in this direction is essential for traditional retail merchants,
due to the growth in online purchasing coupled with rapid delivery. The
threat to retail has become so significant that an estimated 75,000 stores
are expected to close during the next few years. But, this also means that
retailers will need to push out older and slow moving inventories, often by
aggressive price cutting, to make way for a leaner and more focused
product selection in their stores.
These changes have resulted in challenging times for retailers and in better
prices and selections for consumers. In most markets, the reality is that
when one sector wins, another has to lose. While the eventual winners are
hard to predict, it would appear that companies that can master both
omnichannel and supply chain management have the best likelihood to
survive and possibly thrive.
Sources: Jennifer Smith, “Inventory Reduction Push and J.C. Penney Thins Margins,” Wall
Street Journal Online (November 15, 2018); Abha Bhattarai, “ ‘Retail Apocalypse’ Now: Analysts
Say More than 75,000 U.S. Stores Could Be Doomed,” Washington Post Online (April 10, 2019);
and Lauren Thomas, “JCPenney Is Fading. Nordstrom Is Struggling. Walmart Is Thriving. That
Sums Up What’s Happening in Retail,” www.cnbc.com (July 24, 2019).
Costs Included in Inventory
One of the most important problems in dealing with inventories concerns the
dollar amount at which to carry the inventory in the accounts. Companies
generally account for the acquisition of inventories, like other
assets, on a cost basis.

--- Page 641 ---
Product Costs
Product costs are those costs that “attach” to the inventory. As a result, a
company records product costs in the Inventory account. These costs are
directly connected with bringing the goods to the buyer’s place of business and
converting such goods to a salable condition. Such charges generally include
(1) costs of purchase, (2) costs of conversion, and (3) “other costs” incurred in
bringing the inventories to the point of sale and in salable condition.
Costs of purchase include:
1. The purchase price.
2. Import duties and other taxes.
3. Transportation costs.
4. Handling costs directly related to the acquisition of the goods. [3]
Conversion costs for a manufacturing company include direct materials, direct
labor, and manufacturing overhead costs. Manufacturing overhead costs
include indirect materials, indirect labor, and various costs, such as
depreciation, taxes, insurance, and utilities.3
“Other costs” include those incurred to bring the inventory to its present
location and condition ready to sell, such as the cost to design a product for
specific customer needs. For example, if a customer of Lenovo (CHN)
requests that computers to be sold in Europe have an additional power adapter
that is compatible with European power sources, the cost to design a
multisource-adapter would be included in the cost of the computer.
It seems proper also to allocate to inventories a share of any purchasing costs
or expenses of a purchasing department, storage costs, and other costs incurred
in storing or handling the goods before their sale. However, because of the
practical difficulties involved in allocating such costs and expenses, companies
usually exclude these items in valuing inventories.
Period Costs
Period costs are those costs that are indirectly related to the acquisition or
production of goods. Period costs such as selling expenses and, under ordinary
circumstances, general and administrative expenses are therefore not included
as part of inventory cost.
Yet, conceptually, these expenses are as much a cost of the product as the
initial purchase price and related freight charges attached to the product. Why
then do companies exclude these costs from inventoriable items? Because

--- Page 642 ---
companies generally consider selling expenses as more directly related to the
cost of goods sold than to the unsold inventory. In addition, period costs,
especially administrative expenses, are so unrelated or indirectly related to the
immediate production process that any allocation is purely arbitrary.4
Interest is another period cost. Companies usually expense interest costs
associated with getting inventories ready for sale. Supporters of this approach
argue that interest costs are really a cost of financing. Others contend that
interest costs incurred to finance activities associated with readying
inventories for sale are as much a cost of the asset as materials, labor, and
overhead. Therefore, they reason, companies should capitalize interest costs.
The IASB ruled that companies should capitalize interest costs
related to assets constructed for internal use or assets produced as
discrete projects (such as ships or real estate projects) for sale or
lease. [7]5 The IASB emphasized that these discrete projects should take
considerable time, entail substantial expenditures, and be likely to involve
significant amounts of interest cost. Thus, a company should not capitalize
interest costs for inventories that it routinely manufactures or otherwise
produces in large quantities on a repetitive basis. In this case, the
informational benefit does not justify the cost.
Treatment of Purchase Discounts
Purchase or trade discounts are reductions in the selling prices granted to
customers. These discounts may be used to provide an incentive for a first-time
purchase or as a reward for a large order. In some cases, incentives are
provided to encourage early payment. There has been some diversity in
practice regarding the accounting for these discounts, with some companies
recording the discount as a reduction in inventory while others treated the
discount as revenue. However, the IASB requires these discounts to be
recorded as a reduction from the cost of inventories. [8]
With respect to the bookkeeping related to purchase discounts, the use of a
Purchase Discounts account in a periodic inventory system indicates that
the company is reporting its purchases and accounts payable at the gross
amount. If a company uses this gross method, it reports purchase discounts
as a deduction from purchases on the income statement.
Another approach is to record the purchases and accounts payable at an
amount net of the cash discount. In this approach, the company records
failure to take a purchase discount within the discount period in a Purchase
Discounts Lost account. If a company uses this net method, it considers
purchase discounts lost as a financial expense and reports it in the “Other

--- Page 643 ---
income and expense” section of the income statement. This treatment is
considered better for two reasons. (1) It provides a correct reporting of the cost
of the asset and related liability and (2) It can measure management
inefficiency by holding management responsible for discounts not taken.
To highlight the difference between the gross and net methods, assume the
transactions shown in Illustration 8.6.
Many believe that the somewhat more complicated net method is not justified
by the resulting benefits (see Underlying Concepts). This could account for
the widespread use of the less logical but simpler gross method. In addition,
some contend that management is reluctant to report in the financial
statements the amount of purchase discounts lost. For homework purposes,
unless otherwise specified, use the gross method to record purchase discounts.
Underlying Concepts
Not using the net method because of resultant difficulties is an example of
the application of the cost constraint.
ILLUSTRATION 8.6 Entries under Gross and Net Methods
Which Cost Flow Assumption to Adopt?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for inventories.

--- Page 644 ---
During any given fiscal period, companies typically purchase merchandise at
several different prices. If a company prices inventories at cost and it made
numerous purchases at different unit costs, which cost should it use?
Conceptually, a specific identification of the given items sold and unsold seems
optimal. Therefore, the IASB requires use of the specific identification method
in cases where inventories are not ordinarily interchangeable, or for
goods and services produced or segregated for specific projects. For
example, an inventory of single-family homes is a good candidate for use of the
specific identification method. Unfortunately, for most companies, the specific
identification method is not practicable. Only in situations where inventory
turnover is low, unit price is high, or inventory quantities are small are the
specific identification criteria met. In other cases, the cost of inventory should
be measured using one of two cost flow assumptions: (1) first-in, first-out
(FIFO) or (2) average-cost. [9]
To illustrate these cost flow methods, assume that Call-Mart SpA had the
following transactions in its first month of operations.
Date
Purchases
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2
2,000 @ €4.00
2,000 units
March 15 6,000 @ €4.40
8,000 units
March 19
4,000 units
4,000 units
March 30 2,000 @ €4.75
6,000 units
From this information, Call-Mart computes the ending inventory of
6,000 units and the cost of goods available for sale (beginning
inventory + purchases) of €43,900 [(2,000 @ €4.00) + (6,000 @ €4.40) +
(2,000 @ €4.75)]. The question is, which price or prices should it assign to the
6,000 units of ending inventory? The answer depends on which cost flow
assumption it uses.
Specific Identification
Specific identification calls for identifying each item sold and each item in
inventory. A company includes in cost of goods sold the costs of the specific
items sold. It includes in inventory the costs of the specific items on hand. This
method may be used only in instances where it is practical to separate
physically the different purchases made. As a result, most companies only use
this method when handling a relatively small number of costly, easily
distinguishable items. In the retail trade, this includes some types of jewelry,
fur coats, automobiles, and some furniture. In manufacturing, it includes
special orders and many products manufactured under a job cost system.

--- Page 645 ---
To illustrate, assume that Call-Mart’s 6,000 units of inventory consists of
1,000 units from the March 2 purchase, 3,000 from the March 15 purchase,
and 2,000 from the March 30 purchase. Illustration 8.7 shows how Call-
Mart computes the ending inventory and cost of goods sold.
Date
No. of Units
Unit
Cost
Total
Cost
March 2
1,000
€4.00 € 4,000
March 15
3,000
4.40
13,200
March 30
2,000
4.75
9,500
Ending inventory
6,000
€26,700
Cost of goods available for sale (computed in
previous section)
€43,900
Deduct: Ending inventory
26,700
Cost of goods sold
€17,200
ILLUSTRATION 8.7 Specific Identification Method
This method appears ideal. Specific identification matches actual costs against
actual revenue. Thus, a company reports ending inventory at actual cost. In
other words, under specific identification the cost flow matches the
physical flow of the goods. On closer observation, however, this method
has certain deficiencies in addition to its lack of practicability in many
situations.
Some argue that specific identification allows a company to manipulate net
income. For example, assume that a wholesaler purchases identical plywood
early in the year at three different prices. When it sells the plywood, the
wholesaler can select either the lowest or the highest price to charge to
expense. It simply selects the plywood from a specific lot for delivery to the
customer. A business manager, therefore, can manipulate net income by
delivering to the customer the higher- or lower-priced item, depending on
whether the company seeks lower or higher reported earnings for the period.
Another problem relates to the arbitrary allocation of costs that sometimes
occurs with specific inventory items. For example, a company often faces
difficulty in relating freight charges, storage costs, and discounts directly to a
given inventory item. This results in allocating these costs somewhat
arbitrarily, leading to a “breakdown” in the precision of the specific
identification method.6

--- Page 646 ---
Average-Cost
As the name implies, the average-cost method prices items in the inventory
on the basis of the average cost of all similar goods available during the period.
To illustrate use of the periodic inventory method (amount of inventory
computed at the end of the period), Call-Mart computes the ending inventory
and cost of goods sold using a weighted-average method as shown in
Illustration 8.8.
Date of Invoice
No. of Units
Unit Cost
Total Cost
March 2
2,000
€4.00
€ 8,000
March 15
6,000
4.40
26,400
March 30
2,000
4.75
9,500
Total goods available
10,000
€43,900
Weighted-average cost per unit
= €4.39
Inventory in units
6,000 units
Ending inventory
6,000 × €4.39 = €26,340
Cost of goods available for sale
€43,900
Deduct: Ending inventory
26,340
Cost of goods sold
€17,560
ILLUSTRATION 
8.8 
Weighted-Average 
Method—Periodic
Inventory
In computing the average cost per unit, Call-Mart includes the beginning
inventory, if any, both in the total units available and in the total cost of goods
available.
Companies use the moving-average method with perpetual inventory
records. Illustration 8.9 shows the application of the average-cost method
for perpetual records.
€43,900
100,00

--- Page 647 ---
Date
Purchased
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2 (2,000 @
€4.00)
€ 8,000
(2,000 @
€4.00)
€ 8,000
March
15
(6,000 @
4.40)
26,400
(8,000 @
4.30)
34,400
March
19
(4,000 @ €4.30)
€17,200
(4,000 @
4.30)
17,200
March
30
(2,000 @
4.75)
9,500
(6,000 @
4.45)
26,700
ILLUSTRATION 8.9 Moving-Average Method—Perpetual Inventory
In this method, Call-Mart computes a new average unit cost each time it
makes a purchase. For example, on March 15, after purchasing 6,000 units for
€26,400, Call-Mart has 8,000 units costing €34,400 (€8,000 plus €26,400) on
hand. The average unit cost is €34,400 divided by 8,000, or €4.30. Call-Mart
uses this unit cost in costing withdrawals until it makes another purchase. At
that point, Call-Mart computes a new average unit cost. Accordingly, the
company shows the cost of the 4,000 units withdrawn on March 19 at €4.30,
for a total cost of goods sold of €17,200. On March 30, following the purchase
of 2,000 units for €9,500, Call-Mart determines a new unit cost of €4.45, for
an ending inventory of €26,700.
Companies often use average-cost methods for practical rather than conceptual
reasons. These methods are simple to apply and objective. They are not as
subject to income manipulation as some of the other inventory pricing
methods. In addition, proponents of the average-cost methods reason that
measuring a specific physical flow of inventory is often impossible. Therefore,
it is better to cost items on an average-price basis. This argument is particularly
persuasive when dealing with similar inventory items.
First-In, First-Out (FIFO)
The first-in, first-out (FIFO) method assumes that a company uses goods
in the order in which it purchases them. In other words, the FIFO method
assumes that the first goods purchased are the first used (in a
manufacturing concern) or the first sold (in a merchandising concern). The
inventory remaining must therefore represent the most recent purchases.
To illustrate, assume that Call-Mart uses the periodic inventory system. It
determines its cost of the ending inventory by taking the cost of the most
recent purchase and working back until it accounts for all units in the

--- Page 648 ---
inventory. Call-Mart determines its ending inventory and cost of goods sold as
shown in Illustration 8.10.
Date
No. of Units
Unit Cost Total Cost
March 30
2,000
€4.75
€ 9,500
March 15
4,000
4.40
17,600
Ending inventory
6,000
€27,100
Cost of goods available for sale
€43,900
Deduct: Ending inventory
27,100
Cost of goods sold
€16,800
ILLUSTRATION 8.10 FIFO Method—Periodic Inventory
If Call-Mart instead uses a perpetual inventory system in quantities and euros,
it attaches a cost figure to each withdrawal. Then, the cost of the 4,000 units
removed on March 19 consists of the cost of the items purchased on March 2
and March 15. Illustration 8.11 shows the inventory on a FIFO basis
perpetual system for Call-Mart.
ILLUSTRATION 8.11 FIFO Method—Perpetual Inventory
Here, the ending inventory is €27,100, and the cost of goods sold is €16,800
[(2,000 @ €4.00) + (2,000 @ €4.40)].
Notice that in these two FIFO examples, the cost of goods sold (€16,800) and
ending inventory (€27,100) are the same. In all cases where FIFO is used,
the amount reported for ending inventory and cost of goods sold
would be the same at the end of the month whether a perpetual or
periodic system is used. Why? Because the same costs will always be first in
and, therefore, first out. This is true whether a company computes cost of
goods sold as it sells goods throughout the accounting period (the perpetual
system) or as a residual at the end of the accounting period (the periodic
system).

--- Page 649 ---
One objective of FIFO is to approximate the physical flow of goods. When the
physical flow of goods is actually first-in, first-out, the FIFO method closely
approximates specific identification. At the same time, it prevents
manipulation of income. With FIFO, a company cannot pick a certain cost item
to charge to expense.
Another advantage of the FIFO method is that the ending inventory is close to
current cost. Because the first goods in are the first goods out, the ending
inventory amount consists of the most recent purchases. This is particularly
true with rapid inventory turnover. This approach generally approximates
replacement cost on the statement of financial position when price changes
have not occurred since the most recent purchases.
However, the FIFO method fails to match current costs against current
revenues on the income statement. A company charges the oldest costs against
the more current revenue, possibly distorting gross profit and net income.
Companies often combine inventory methods. For example, Nestlé (CHE)
uses FIFO for its raw materials inventories and prices the remainder using
average-cost. For high inventory turnover in certain product lines, a company
cannot justify FIFO’s additional recordkeeping and expense. In such cases, a
company often uses average-cost because it is easy to compute.7
Although a company may use a variety of inventory methods to assist in
accurate computation of net income, once it selects a pricing method, it
must apply it consistently thereafter. If conditions indicate that the
inventory pricing method in use is unsuitable, the company must seriously
consider all other possibilities before selecting another method. It should
clearly explain any change and disclose its effect in the financial statements.8
Inventory Valuation Methods—Summary Analysis
The preceding sections of this chapter described a number of inventory
valuation methods. Here, we present a brief summary of the two commonly
used inventory cost flow methods to show the effects these valuation methods
have on the financial statements. This comparison assumes periodic inventory
procedures and the following selected data.
Selected Data
Beginning cash balance
€ 7,000
Beginning retained earnings
€10,000
Beginning inventory:
4,000 units @ € 3 €12,000
Purchases:
6,000 units @ € 4 €24,000

--- Page 650 ---
Sales:
5,000 units @ €12 €60,000
Operating expenses
€10,000
Income tax rate
40%
Illustration 8.12 shows the comparative results on net income of the use of
average-cost and FIFO.
Average-Cost
FIFO
Sales
€60,000
€60,000
Cost of goods sold
18,000a
16,000b
Gross profit
42,000
44,000
Operating expenses
10,000
10,000
Income before taxes
32,000
34,000
Income taxes (40%)
12,800
13,600
Net income
€19,200
€20,400
a4,000 @ €3 = €12,000 b4,000 @ €3 = €12,000
6,000 @ €4 = 24,000
1,000 @ €4 = 4,000
€36,000
€16,000
€36,000 ÷ 10,000 = €3.60
€3.6 × 5,000 = €18,000
ILLUSTRATION 8.12 Comparative Results of Average-Cost and
FIFO Methods
Notice that gross profit and net income are higher under FIFO compared to
average-cost because prices are increasing.
Illustration 8.13 shows the final balances of selected items at the end of the
period.

--- Page 651 ---
Inventory
Gross
Profit
Taxes
Net Income
Retained
Earnings
Cash
Average-
Cost
€18,000
(5,000 ×
€3.60)
€42,000
€12,800
€19,200
€29,200
(€10,000
+
€19,200)
€20,200a
FIFO
€20,000
(5,000 ×
€4)
€44,000
€13,600
€20,400
€30,400
(€10,000
+
€20,400)
€19,400a
aCash at
Year-End
=
Beg.
Balance
+
Sales
−Purchases −Operating
expenses
−
Taxes
Average-
cost—
€20,200
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
€12,800
FIFO—
€19,400
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
€13,600
ILLUSTRATION 8.13 Balances of Selected Items under Alternative
Inventory Valuation Methods
The average-cost method results in the higher cash balance at year-end
(because taxes are lower). This example assumes that prices are rising. The
opposite result occurs if prices are declining.
Effect of Inventory Errors
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial statements.
Items incorrectly included or excluded in determining cost of goods sold
through inventory misstatements will result in errors in the financial
statements. Let’s look at two cases, assuming a periodic inventory system.
Ending Inventory Misstated
What would happen if Lenovo (CHN) correctly records its beginning
inventory and purchases, but fails to include some items in ending inventory?

--- Page 652 ---
In this situation, Illustration 8.14 shows the resultant effects on the
financial statements at the end of the period.
Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
Inventory
Understated Cost of goods sold Overstated
Retained earnings Understated
Working capital
Understated Net income
Understated
Current ratio
Understated
ILLUSTRATION 8.14 Financial Statement Effects of Misstated
Ending Inventory
If ending inventory is understated, working capital and the current ratio are
understated. If cost of goods sold is overstated, then net income is understated.
To illustrate the effect on net income over a two-year period (2022–2023),
assume that Yei Chen Ltd. understates its ending inventory by HK$10,000 (in
thousands) in 2022; all other items are correctly stated. The effect of this error
is to decrease net income in 2022 and to increase net income in 2023. The
error is counterbalanced (offset) in 2023 because beginning inventory is
understated and net income is overstated. As Illustration 8.15 shows, the
income statement misstates the net income figures for both 2022 and 2023,
although the total for the two years is correct (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
When inventory is misstated, its presentation lacks representational
usefulness.

--- Page 653 ---
ILLUSTRATION 8.15 Effect of Ending Inventory Error on Two
Period
If Yei Chen overstates ending inventory in 2022, the reverse effect occurs.
Inventory, working capital, current ratio, and net income are overstated and
cost of goods sold is understated. The effect of the error on net income will be
counterbalanced in 2023, but the income statement misstates both years’ net
income figures.
Purchases and Inventory Misstated
Suppose that Bishop Company does not record as a purchase certain goods that
it owns and does not count them in ending inventory. Illustration 8.16
shows the effect on the financial statements (assuming this is a purchase on
account).

--- Page 654 ---
Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
Inventory
Understated Purchases
Understated
Retained earnings No effect
Cost of goods sold No effect
Accounts payable Understated Net income
No effect
Working capital
No effect
Inventory (ending) Understated
Current ratio
Overstated
ILLUSTRATION 8.16 Financial Statement Effects of Misstated
Purchases and Inventory
Omission of goods from purchases and inventory results in an understatement
of inventory and accounts payable in the statement of financial position; it also
results in an understatement of purchases and ending inventory in the income
statement. However, the omission of such goods does not affect net income for
the period. Why not? Because Bishop understates both purchases and ending
inventory by the same amount—the error is thereby offset in cost of goods
sold. Total working capital is unchanged, but the current ratio is overstated
because of the omission of equal amounts from inventory and accounts
payable.
To illustrate the effect on the current ratio, assume that Bishop understated
accounts payable and ending inventory by $40,000. Illustration 8.17 shows
the understated and correct data.
Purchases and Ending Inventory
Understated
Purchases and Ending Inventory
Correct
Current assets
$120,000 Current assets
$160,000
Current liabilities
$ 40,000 Current liabilities
$ 80,000
Current ratio
3 to 1 Current ratio
2 to 1
ILLUSTRATION 8.17 Effects of Purchases and Ending Inventory
Errors
The understated data indicate a current ratio of 3 to 1, whereas the correct ratio
is 2 to 1. Thus, understatement of accounts payable and ending inventory can
lead to a “window dressing” of the current ratio. That is, Bishop can make the
current ratio appear better than it is.
If Bishop overstates both purchases (on account) and ending inventory, then
the effects on the statement of financial position are exactly the reverse. The
financial statements overstate inventory and accounts payable, and understate
the current ratio. The overstatement does not affect cost of goods sold and net

--- Page 655 ---
income because the errors offset one another. Similarly, working capital is not
affected.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of proper inventory measurement in
presenting accurate financial statements. For example, one women’s apparel
maker had accounting irregularities that wiped out one year’s net income and
caused a restatement of the prior year’s earnings. One reason: It inflated
inventory and deflated cost of goods sold. In another case, a company had to
restate its income by $1.7 million because an accountant in the antenna
manufacturing division overstated the ending inventory, thereby reducing its
cost of sales.
APPENDIX 8A LIFO Cost Flow Assumption
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Describe the LIFO cost flow assumption.
As we discussed in the chapter, under IFRS, LIFO is not permitted for financial
reporting purposes. In prohibiting LIFO, the IASB noted that use of LIFO
results in inventories being recognized in the statement of financial position at
amounts that may bear little relationship to recent cost levels of inventories.
While some argued for use of LIFO because it may better match the costs of
recently purchased inventory with current prices, the Board concluded that it is
not appropriate to allow an approach that results in a measurement of profit or
loss for the period that is inconsistent with the measurement of inventories in
the statement of financial position. [12] Nonetheless, LIFO is permitted for
financial reporting purposes in the United States, it is permitted for tax
purposes in some countries, and its use can result in significant tax savings. In
this appendix, we provide an expanded discussion of LIFO inventory
procedures.
Last-In, First-Out (LIFO)
The last-in, first-out (LIFO) method matches the cost of the last goods
purchased against revenue. To illustrate, we extend the Call-Mart example
introduced in Illustration 8.7. Recall that Call-Mart SpA had the following
transactions in its first month of operations.
Date
Purchases
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2
2,000 @ €4.00
2,000 units

--- Page 656 ---
March 15 6,000 @ €4.40
8,000 units
March 19
4,000 units
4,000 units
March 30 2,000 @ €4.75
6,000 units
If Call-Mart uses a periodic inventory system, it assumes that the cost of the
total quantity sold or issued during the month comes from the most
recent purchases. Call-Mart prices the ending inventory by using the total
units as a basis of computation and disregards the exact dates of sales or
issuances. For example, Call-Mart would assume that the cost of the 4,000
units withdrawn absorbed the 2,000 units purchased on March 30 and 2,000
of the 6,000 units purchased on March 15. Illustration 8A.1 shows how Call-
Mart computes the inventory and related cost of goods sold, using the periodic
inventory method.
Date of Invoice
No. of Units Unit Cost Total Cost
March 2
2,000
€4.00
€ 8,000
March 15
4,000
4.40
17,600
Ending inventory
6,000
€25,600
Goods available for sale
€ 43,900
Deduct: Ending inventory
25,600
Cost of goods sold
€18,300
ILLUSTRATION 8A.1 LIFO Method—Periodic Inventory
If Call-Mart keeps a perpetual inventory record in quantities and euros, use of
the LIFO method results in different ending inventory and cost of goods
sold amounts than the amounts calculated under the periodic
method. Illustration 8A.2 shows these differences under the perpetual
method.
ILLUSTRATION 8A.2 LIFO Method—Perpetual Inventory

--- Page 657 ---
The month-end periodic inventory computation presented in Illustration 8A.1
(inventory €25,600 and cost of goods sold €18,300) shows a different amount
than the perpetual inventory computation (inventory €26,300 and cost of
goods sold €17,600). The periodic system (with ending inventory determined
by a physical count at the end of the month) matches the total withdrawals for
the month with the total purchases for the month in applying the last-in, first-
out method. In contrast, the perpetual system matches each withdrawal with
the immediately preceding purchases. In effect, the periodic computation
assumed that Call-Mart included the cost of the goods that it purchased on
March 30 in the sale or issue on March 19.
Inventory Valuation Methods—Summary Analysis
With the addition of the LIFO example, we can revisit the summary analysis
presented in the chapter, which was based on the following data. Recall that
this example assumes periodic inventory procedures.
Beginning cash balance
€ 7,000
Beginning retained earnings
€10,000
Beginning inventory:
4,000 units @ € 3 €12,000
Purchases:
6,000 units @ € 4 €24,000
Sales:
5,000 units @ €12 €60,000
Operating expenses
€10,000
Income tax rate
40%
Illustration 8A.3 shows the comparative results on net income of the use of
Average-Cost, FIFO, and LIFO.

--- Page 658 ---
Average-Cost
FIFO
LIFO
Sales
€60,000
€60,000
€60,000
Cost of goods
sold
18,000a
16,000b
20,000c
Gross profit
42,000
44,000
40,000
Operating
expenses
10,000
10,000
10,000
Income before
taxes
32,000
34,000
30,000
Income taxes
(40%)
12,800
13,600
12,000
Net income
€19,200
€20,400
€18,000
a4,000 @ €3 =
€12,000
b4,000 @ €3 =
€12,000
c5,000 @ €4 =
€20,000
6,000 @ €4 =
€24,000
1,000 @ €4 =
€ 4,000
€36,000
€16,000
€36,000 ÷ 10,000 =
€ 3.60
€ 3.60 × 5,000 =
€18,000
ILLUSTRATION 8A.3 Comparative Results of Average-Cost, FIFO,
and LIFO Methods
Notice that gross profit and net income are lowest under LIFO, highest under
FIFO, and somewhere in the middle under average-cost.
Illustration 8A.4 shows the final balances of selected items at the end of the
period.

--- Page 659 ---
Inventory
Gross
Profit
Taxes
Net Income Retained
Earnings
Cash
Average-
Cost
€18,000
(5,000 ×
€3.60)
€42,000
€12,800
€19,200
€29,200
(€10,000
+
€19,200)
€20,200a
FIFO
€20,000
(5,000 ×
€4)
€44,000
€13,600
€20,400
€30,400
(€10,000
+
€20,400)
€19,400a
LIFO
€16,000
(4,000 ×
€3)
(1,000 ×
€4)
€40,000
€12,000
€18,400
€28,000
(€10,000
+
€18,000)
€21,000a
aCash at
Year-End
=
Beg.
Balance
+
Sales
−Purchases −Operating
expenses
−
Taxes
Average-
cost—
€20,200
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
€12,800
FIFO—
€19,400
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
€13,600
LIFO—
€21,000
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
€12,600
ILLUSTRATION 8A.4 Balances of Selected Items under Alternative
Inventory Valuation Methods
LIFO results in the highest cash balance at year-end (because taxes are lower).
This example assumes that prices are rising. The opposite result occurs if
prices are declining.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
average-cost method
consigned goods

--- Page 660 ---
cost of goods available for sale or use
cost of goods sold
finished goods inventory
first-in, first-out (FIFO) method
f.o.b. destination
f.o.b. shipping point
gross method
inventories
*last-in, first-out (LIFO) method
merchandise inventory
modified perpetual inventory system
moving-average method
net method
net of the cash discount
period costs
periodic inventory system
perpetual inventory system
product costs
Purchase Discounts
raw materials inventory
specific identification
weighted-average method
work in process inventory
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe inventory classifications and different inventory
systems.
Only one inventory account, Inventory, appears in the financial statements of a
merchandising concern. A manufacturer normally has three inventory
accounts: Raw Materials, Work in Process, and Finished Goods. Companies

--- Page 661 ---
report the cost assigned to goods and materials on hand but not yet placed into
production as raw materials inventory. They report the cost of the raw
materials on which production has been started but not completed, plus the
direct labor cost applied specifically to this material and a ratable share of
manufacturing overhead costs, as work in process inventory. Finally, they
report the costs identified with the completed but unsold units on hand at the
end of the fiscal period as finished goods inventory.
A perpetual inventory system maintains a continuous record of inventory
changes in the Inventory account. That is, a company records all purchases and
sales (issues) of goods directly in the Inventory account as they occur. Under a
periodic inventory system, companies determine the quantity of inventory
on hand only periodically. A company debits a Purchases account, but the
Inventory account remains the same. It determines cost of goods sold at the
end of the period by subtracting ending inventory from cost of goods available
for sale. A company ascertains ending inventory by physical count.
2 Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
Companies record purchases of inventory when they obtain legal title to the
goods (generally when they receive the goods). Shipping terms must be
evaluated to determine when legal title passes, and careful consideration must
be made for cost of goods sold on consignment and sales with repurchase
agreements and high rates of return.
Product costs are those costs that attach to the inventory and are recorded in
the Inventory account. Such charges include freight charges on (1) costs of
purchase, (2) costs of conversion, and (3) “other costs” incurred in bringing the
inventories to the point of sale and in salable condition. Period costs are
those costs that are indirectly related to the acquisition or production of goods.
These changes, such as selling expense and general and administrative
expenses, are therefore not included as part of inventory cost.
3 Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for
inventories.
The IASB requires use of the specific identification method in cases where
inventories are not ordinarily interchangeable or for goods and services
produced or segregated for specific projects. Only in situations where inventory
turnover is low, unit price is high, or inventory quantities are small are the
specific identification criteria met. In other cases companies use one of two
cost flow assumptions. (1) Average-cost prices items in the inventory on the

--- Page 662 ---
basis of the average cost of all similar goods available during the period. (2)
First-in, first-out (FIFO) assumes that a company uses goods in the order in
which it purchases them. The inventory remaining must therefore represent
the most recent purchases.
4 Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial
statements.
If the company misstates ending inventory: (1) In the statement of financial
position, the inventory and retained earnings will be misstated, which will lead
to miscalculation of the working capital and current ratio, and (2) in the
income statement, the cost of goods sold and net income will be misstated. If
the company misstates purchases (and related accounts payable) and
inventory: (1) Statement of financial position, the inventory and accounts
payable will be misstated, which will lead to miscalculation of the current ratio,
and (2) in the income statement, purchases and ending inventory will be
misstated.
*5 Describe the LIFO cost flow assumption.
The LIFO method assumes that the last items purchased are the first items
sold. This method matches the costs of the most recently purchased items with
revenues in the period. In times of rising prices, use of the LIFO method
results in lower net income and income taxes and higher cash flow.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises
with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Mayhew AG has the following inventory, purchases, and sales data for the
month of March. The physical inventory count on March 31 shows 500 units
on hand.
Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00 € 800
Purchases: March 10 500 units @ €4.50 2,250
March 20 400 units @ €4.75 1,900

--- Page 663 ---
March 30 300 units @ €5.00 1,500
Sales:
March 15 500 units
March 25 400 units
Instructions
a. Under a periodic inventory system, determine the cost of inventory
on hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March under (1)
FIFO and (2) average-cost.
b. Under a perpetual inventory system, determine the cost of inventory
on hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March under (1)
FIFO and (2) average-cost.
Solution
a. The cost of goods available for sale is €6,450, as follows.
Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00 € 800
Purchases: March 10
500 units @ €4.50
2,250
March 20
400 units @ €4.75
1,900
March 30
300 units @ €5.00
1,500
Total:
1,400
€6,450
Under a periodic inventory system, the cost of goods sold under each
cost flow method is as follows.
1. 
FIFO Method
Ending inventory:
Date
Units Unit Cost Total Cost
March 30
300
€5.00
€1,500
March 20
200
4.75
950 €2,450
Cost of goods sold: €6,450 − €2,450 = €4,000
2. 
Average-Cost Method
Average unit cost: €6,450 ÷ 1,400 = €4.607
Ending inventory: 500 × €4.607 = €2,303.50
Cost of goods sold: €6,450 − €2,303.50 = €4,146.50
b. The cost of goods available for sale is €6,450, as follows.

--- Page 664 ---
Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00
€800
Purchases: March 10
500 units @ €4.50
2,250
March 20
400 units @ €4.75
1,900
March 30
300 units @ €5.00
1,500
Total:
1,400
€6,450
Under a perpetual inventory system, the cost of goods sold under each
cost flow method is as follows.
1. 
2. 
Moving-Average Cost Method
Date
Purchases
Cost of Goods
Sold
Balance
March
1
(200 @
€4.00)
€ 800
March
10
(500 @ €4.50)
€2,250
(700 @
€4.357)
€3,050
March
15
(500 @ €4.357)
€ 2,179
(200 @
€4.357)
€ 871
March
20
(400 @ €4.75)
€1,900
(600 @
€4.618)
€2,771
March
(400 @ €4.618)
(200 @
€ 924

--- Page 665 ---
25
€ 1,847
€4.618)
March
30
(300 @ €5.00)
€1,500
(500 @
€4.848)
€2,424
Ending inventory
€2,424
Cost of goods sold: €2,179 +
€1,847 = €4,026
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are
available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in
the appendix to the chapter.
Questions
1. In what ways are the inventory accounts of a merchandising company
different from those of a manufacturing company?
2. Why should inventories be included in (a) a statement of financial position
and (b) the computation of net income?
3. What is the difference between a perpetual inventory and a physical
inventory? If a company maintains a perpetual inventory, should its physical
inventory at any date be equal to the amount indicated by the perpetual
inventory records? Why?
4. Mishima Ltd. indicated in a recent annual report that approximately ¥19
million of merchandise was received on consignment. Should Mishima, Inc.
report this amount on its statement of financial position? Explain.
5. What is a product financing arrangement? How should product financing
arrangements be reported in the financial statements?
6. Where, if at all, should the following items be classified on a statement of
financial position?
a. Goods out on approval to customers.
b. Goods in transit that were recently purchased f.o.b. destination.
c. Land held by a realty firm for sale.
d. Raw materials.
e. Goods received on consignment.

--- Page 666 ---
f. Manufacturing supplies.
7. Yang Specialty Products has a generous return policy. Yang gives customers
a 30-day trial period, after which they can return the product for a full refund if
not satisfied. Under what conditions can Yang consider the inventory sold
when the generous return policy is offered?
8. Holland Home Electronics transfers (sells) inventory to Oslo ASA with right
of return within the next 3 months. Advise Holland management on the
conditions under which it can consider goods sold under this plan.
9. Define “cost” as applied to the valuation of inventories.
10. Distinguish between product costs and period costs as they relate to
inventory.
11. Honda (JPN) is considering alternative methods of accounting for the
cash discounts it takes when paying suppliers promptly. One method suggested
was to report these discounts as financial income when payments are made.
Comment on the propriety of this approach.
12. Wysocki Company has incurred borrowing costs as part of its
manufacturing process of its inventory. Should these costs be included in the
cost of the inventory? Explain.
13. Biestek Meat-Packing SA historically has experienced a 0.5% spoilage rate
associated with production of its Polish sausage line of products. However, due
to installation of new meat-grinding equipment, higher than usual spoilage of
€45,000 was experienced on the Polish sausage line in a recent month. How
should Biestek account for both the usual and increased spoilage in
determining the cost of its sausage inventory?
14. Zonker NV purchases 500 units of an item at an invoice cost of €30,000.
What is the cost per unit? If the goods are shipped f.o.b. shipping point and the
freight bill was €1,500, what is the cost per unit if Zonker pays the freight
charges? If these items were bought on 2/10, n/30 terms and the invoice and
the freight bill were paid within the 10-day period, what would be the cost per
unit?
15. Specific identification is sometimes said to be the ideal method of
assigning cost to inventory and to cost of goods sold. Briefly indicate the
arguments for and against this method of inventory valuation.
16. FIFO and weighted-average methods are often used instead of specific
identification for inventory valuation purposes. Compare these methods with
the specific identification method, discussing the theoretical propriety of each
method in the determination of income and asset valuation.

--- Page 667 ---
17. In the third quarter of 2023, David Beckham, the controller for Swiss
Precision Company, discovers an error in ending inventory counts for the
December 31, 2022, cutoff. After Beckham reports the error in a management
meeting, the president for Swiss argues that this error in the prior year is of no
consequence to the 2023 financial statements. How should Beckham respond
to the president?
18. At the statement of financial position date, Clarkson Company held title to
goods in transit amounting to $214,000. This amount was omitted from the
purchases figure for the year and also from the ending inventory. What is the
effect of this omission on the net income for the year as calculated when the
books are closed? What is the effect on the company’s statement of financial
position? Is materiality a factor in determining whether an adjustment for this
item should be made?
*19. As compared with the FIFO method of costing inventories, does the LIFO
method result in a larger or smaller net income in a period of rising prices?
What is the comparative effect on net income in a period of falling prices?
Brief Exercises
BE8.1 (LO 1) Included in the December 31 trial balance of Rivera A.Ş. are the
following assets.
Cash
₺190,000 Work in process
₺200,000
Equipment (net)
1,100,000 Accounts receivable (net)
400,000
Prepaid insurance
41,000 Patents
110,000
Raw materials
335,000 Finished goods
170,000
Prepare the current assets section of the December 31 statement of financial
position.
BE8.2 (LO 1) Matlock SE uses a perpetual inventory system. Its beginning
inventory consists of 50 units that cost €34 each. During June, the company
purchased 150 units at €34 each, returned 6 units for credit, and sold 125 units
at €50 each. Journalize the June transactions.
BE8.3 (LO 2) Obihiro Ltd. has the following information related to its
inventory of embroidered baseball caps: purchase price, ¥45,000,000; import
duties, ¥375,000; interest costs on inventory loan, ¥520,000; and
transportation costs, ¥125,000. Determine the cost of the Obihiro inventory.
BE8.4 (LO 3) Jakarta Ltd. uses a periodic inventory system. For June, when
the company sold 600 units, the following information is available.

--- Page 668 ---
Units Unit Cost Total Cost
June 1 inventory
150
€5
€750
June 15 purchase
600
6
3,600
June 23 purchase
400
8
3,200
1,150
€7,550
Compute the June 30 inventory and the June cost of goods sold using the
average-cost method. (Round unit costs to two decimal points.)
BE8.5 (LO 3) Data for Jakarta Ltd. are presented in BE8.4. Compute the June
30 inventory and the June cost of goods sold using the FIFO method.
BE8.6 (LO 3) Amsterdam Company uses a periodic inventory system. For
April, when the company sold 600 units, the following information is available.
Units Unit Cost Total Cost
April 1 inventory
250
$10
$ 2,500
April 15 purchase
400
12
4,800
April 23 purchase
350
13
4,550
1,000
$11,850
Compute the April 30 inventory and the April cost of goods sold using the
average-cost method.
BE8.7 (LO 3) Data for Amsterdam Company are presented in BE8.6. Compute
the April 30 inventory and the April cost of goods sold using the FIFO method.
BE8.8 (LO 4) Bienvenu Enterprises reported cost of goods sold for 2022 of
$1,400,000 and retained earnings of $5,200,000 at December 31, 2022.
Bienvenu later discovered that its ending inventories at December 31, 2021 and
2022, were overstated by $110,000 and $35,000, respectively. Determine the
corrected amounts for 2022 cost of goods sold and December 31, 2022,
retained earnings.
BE8.9 (LO 2, 4) Stallman Company took a physical inventory on December
31 and determined that goods costing $200,000 were on hand. Not included in
the physical count were $25,000 of goods purchased from Pelzer Corporation,
f.o.b. shipping point, and $22,000 of goods sold to Alvarez Company for
$30,000, f.o.b. destination. Both the Pelzer purchase and the Alvarez sale were
in transit at year-end. What amount should Stallman report as its December 31
inventory?
*BE8.10 (LO 5) Data for Amsterdam Company are presented in BE8.6.
Compute the April 30 inventory and the April cost of goods sold using the LIFO

--- Page 669 ---
method.
Exercises
E8.1 (LO 1, 2) (Inventoriable Costs) Presented below is a list of items that
may or may not be reported as inventory in a company’s December 31
statement of financial position.
1. Goods sold on an installment basis (bad debts can be reasonably
estimated).
2. Goods out on consignment at another company’s store.
3. Goods purchased f.o.b. shipping point that are in transit at December 31.
4. Goods purchased f.o.b. destination that are in transit at December 31.
5. Goods sold to another company, for which our company has signed an
agreement to repurchase at a set price that covers all costs related to the
inventory.
6. Goods sold where large returns are predictable.
7. Goods sold f.o.b. shipping point that are in transit at December 31.
8. Freight charges on goods purchased.
9. Interest costs incurred for inventories that are routinely manufactured.
10. Materials on hand not yet placed into production by a manufacturing firm.
11. Costs incurred to advertise goods held for resale.
12. Office supplies.
13. Raw materials on which a manufacturing firm has started production but
which are not completely processed.
14. Factory supplies.
15. Goods held on consignment from another company.
16. Costs identified with units completed by a manufacturing firm but not yet
sold.
17. Goods sold f.o.b. destination that are in transit at December 31.
18. Short-term investments in shares and bonds that will be resold in the near
future.
Instructions

--- Page 670 ---
Indicate which of these items would typically be reported as inventory in the
financial statements. If an item should not be reported as inventory, indicate
how it should be reported in the financial statements.
E8.2 (LO 1, 2) (Inventoriable Costs) In your audit of Garza Company, you
find that a physical inventory on December 31, 2022, showed merchandise with
a cost of $441,000 was on hand at that date. You also discover the following
items were all excluded from the $441,000.
1. Merchandise of $61,000 which is held by Garza on consignment. The
consignor is the Bontemps Company.
2. Merchandise costing $33,000 which was shipped by Garza f.o.b.
destination to a customer on December 31, 2022. The customer was
expected to receive the merchandise on January 6, 2023.
3. Merchandise costing $46,000 which was shipped by Garza f.o.b. shipping
point to a customer on December 29, 2022. The customer was scheduled
to receive the merchandise on January 2, 2023.
4. Merchandise costing $73,000 shipped by a vendor f.o.b. destination on
December 30, 2022, and received by Garza on January 4, 2023.
5. Merchandise costing $51,000 shipped by a vendor f.o.b. shipping point on
December 31, 2022, and received by Garza on January 5, 2023.
Instructions
Based on the above information, calculate the amount that should appear on
Garza’s statement of financial position at December 31, 2022, for inventory.
E8.3 (LO 1, 2) (Inventoriable Costs) Assume that in an annual audit of
Webber AG at December 31, 2022, you find the following transactions near the
closing date.
1. A special machine, fabricated to order for a customer, was finished and
specifically segregated in the back part of the shipping room on December
31, 2022. The customer was billed on that date and the machine excluded
from inventory although it was shipped on January 4, 2023.
2. Merchandise costing €2,800 was received on January 3, 2023, and the
related purchase invoice recorded January 5. The invoice showed the
shipment was made on December 29, 2022, f.o.b. destination.
3. A packing case containing a product costing €3,400 was standing in the
shipping room when the physical inventory was taken. It was not included
in the inventory because it was marked “Hold for shipping instructions.”

--- Page 671 ---
Your investigation revealed that the customer’s order was dated December
18, 2022, but that the case was shipped and the customer billed on
January 10, 2023. The product was a stock item of your client.
4. Merchandise costing €720 was received on December 28, 2022, and the
invoice was not recorded. You located it in the hands of the purchasing
agent; it was marked “on consignment.”
5. Merchandise received on January 6, 2023, costing €680 was entered in the
purchase journal on January 7, 2023. The invoice showed shipment was
made f.o.b. supplier’s warehouse on December 31, 2022. Because it was
not on hand at December 31, it was not included in inventory.
Instructions
Assuming that each of the amounts is material, state whether the merchandise
should be included in the client’s inventory, and give your reason for your
decision on each item.
E8.4 (LO 1, 2) (Inventoriable Costs—Perpetual) Bradford Machine plc
maintains a general ledger account for each class of inventory, debiting such
accounts for increases during the period and crediting them for decreases. The
transactions below relate to the Raw Materials inventory account, which is
debited for materials purchased and credited for materials requisitioned for
use.
1. An invoice for £8,100, terms f.o.b. destination, was received and entered
January 2, 2023. The receiving report shows that the materials were
received December 28, 2022.
2. Materials costing £7,300 were returned to the supplier on December 29,
2022, and were shipped f.o.b. shipping point. The return was entered on
that date, even though the materials are not expected to reach the
supplier’s place of business until January 6, 2023.
3. Materials costing £28,000, shipped f.o.b. destination, were not recorded by
December 31, 2022, “because they were in a railroad car on the company’s
siding on that date and had not been unloaded.”
4. An invoice for £7,500, terms f.o.b. shipping point, was received and
entered December 30, 2022. The receiving report shows that the materials
were received January 4, 2023, and the bill of lading shows that they were
shipped January 2, 2023.
5. Materials costing £19,800 were received December 30, 2022, but no entry
was made for them because “they were ordered with a specified delivery of

--- Page 672 ---
no earlier than January 10, 2023.”
Instructions
Prepare correcting general journal entries required at December 31, 2022,
assuming that the books have not been closed.
E8.5 (LO 2) (Determining Merchandise Amounts—Periodic) Two or
more items are omitted in each of the tabulations of income statement data
shown below.
2021
2022
2023
Sales revenue
£290,000
£ ? £410,000
Sales returns and allowances
6,000
13,000
?
Net sales
?
347,000
?
Beginning inventory
20,000
32,000
?
Ending inventory
?
?
?
Purchases
?
260,000
298,000
Purchase returns and allowances
5,000
8,000
10,000
Freight-in
8,000
9,000
12,000
Cost of goods sold
238,000
?
303,000
Gross profit on sales
46,000
91,000
97,000
Instructions
Fill in the amounts that are missing.
E8.6 (LO 2) (Purchases Recorded Net) Presented below are transactions
related to Guillen Ltd, a company that uses the periodic inventory system.
May 10 Purchased goods billed at £20,000 subject to cash discount terms of
2/10, n/60.
11 Purchased goods billed at £15,000 subject to terms of 1/15, n/30.
19 Paid invoice of May 10.
24 Purchased goods billed at £11,500 subject to cash discount terms of
2/10, n/30.
Instructions
a. Prepare general journal entries for the transactions above under the
assumption that purchases are to be recorded at net amounts after cash
discounts and that discounts lost are to be treated as financial expense.

--- Page 673 ---
b. Assuming no purchase or payment transactions other than those given
above, prepare the adjusting entry required on May 31 if financial
statements are to be prepared as of that date.
E8.7 (LO 2) (Purchases Recorded, Gross Method) Ohno Industries
purchased ¥12,000 of merchandise on February 1, 2022, subject to a trade
discount of 10% and with credit terms of 3/15, n/60. It returned ¥3,000 (gross
price before trade or cash discount) on February 4. The invoice was paid on
February 13. (All amounts in thousands.)
Instructions
a. Assuming that Ohno uses the perpetual method for recording
merchandise transactions, record the purchase, return, and payment using
the gross method.
b. Assuming that Ohno uses the periodic method for recording merchandise
transactions, record the purchase, return, and payment using the gross
method.
c. At what amount would the purchase on February 1 be recorded if the net
method were used?
E8.8 (LO 2, 3) (Periodic versus Perpetual Entries) Chippewas Company
sells one product. Presented below is information for January for Chippewas
Company.
Jan.
1 Inventory 100 units at $6 each
4 Sale
80 units at $8 each
11 Purchase 150 units at $6.50 each
13 Sale
120 units at $8.75 each
20 Purchase 160 units at $7 each
27 Sale
100 units at $9 each
Chippewas uses the FIFO cost flow assumption. All purchases and sales are on
account.
Instructions
a. Assume Chippewas uses a periodic system. Prepare all necessary journal
entries, including the end-of-month closing entry, to record cost of goods
sold. A physical count indicates that the ending inventory for January is
110 units.

--- Page 674 ---
b. Compute gross profit using the periodic system.
c. Assume Chippewas uses a perpetual system. Prepare all necessary journal
entries.
d. Compute gross profit using the perpetual system.
E8.9 (LO 3) (FIFO and Average-Cost Determination) LoBianco
Company’s record of transactions for the month of April was as follows.
Purchases
Sales
April
1 (balance on hand)
600 @ $6.00 April
3
500 @ $10.00
4
1,500 @ 6.08
9
1,300 @ 10.00
8
800 @ 6.40
11
600 @ 11.00
13
1,200 @ 6.50
23
1,200 @ 11.00
21
700 @ 6.60
27
900 @ 12.00
29
500 @ 6.79
4,500
5,300
Instructions
(Round unit price averages to four decimal places.)
a. Assuming that periodic inventory records are kept, compute the inventory
at April 30 using (1) FIFO and (2) average-cost.
b. Assuming that perpetual inventory records are kept in both units and
dollars, determine the inventory at April 30 using (1) FIFO and (2)
average-cost.
c. In an inflationary period, which inventory method—FIFO or average-cost
—will show the highest net income?
E8.10 (LO 3) (FIFO and Average-Cost Inventory) Esplanade SA was
formed on December 1, 2021. The following information is available from
Esplanade’s inventory records for Product BAP.
Units Unit Cost
January 1, 2022 (beginning inventory)
600
R$ 8.00
Purchases:
January 5, 2022
1,100
9.00
January 25, 2022
1,300
10.00

--- Page 675 ---
February 16, 2022
800
11.00
March 26, 2022
600
12.00
A physical inventory on March 31, 2022, shows 1,500 units on hand.
Instructions
Assuming Esplanade uses a periodic system, prepare schedules to compute the
ending inventory at March 31, 2022, under each of the following inventory
methods (round to two decimal places).
a. Specific identification.
b. FIFO.
c. Weighted-average.
Under (a), 400 units from the beginning inventory are on hand and 1,100 units
from the January 5 purchase are on hand.
E8.11 (LO 3) (Compute FIFO and Average-Cost—Periodic) The
following information is related to radios for the Couples Company for the
month of July.
Date Transaction
Units
In
Units
Cost
Total
Units
Sold
Selling
Price
Total
July
1
Balance
100
$4.10
$ 410
6 Purchase
800
4.30
3,440
7 Sale
300
$7.00 $ 2,100
10 Sale
300
7.30
2,190
12 Purchase
400
4.51
1,804
15 Sale
200
7.40
1,480
18 Purchase
300
4.60
1,380
22 Sale
400
7.40
2,960
25 Purchase
500
4.58
2,290
30 Sale
200
7.50
1,500
Totals
2,100
$9,324
1,400
$10,230
Instructions

--- Page 676 ---
a. Assuming that the periodic inventory method is used, compute the
inventory cost at July 31 under each of the following cost flow
assumptions. (Ignore taxes.)
1. FIFO.
2. Weighted-average.
b. Answer the following questions.
1. Which of the methods used above will yield the highest figure for
gross profit for the income statement? Explain why.
2. Which of the methods used above will yield the highest figure for
ending inventory for the statement of financial position? Explain why.
E8.12 (LO 3) (FIFO and Average-Cost, Income Statement
Presentation) The board of directors of Oksana ASA is considering whether
or not it should instruct the accounting department to change from a first-in,
first-out (FIFO) basis of pricing inventories to an average-cost basis. The
following information is available.
Sales
20,000 units @ €50
Inventory, January 1
6,000 units @ 20
Purchases
6,000 units @ 22
10,000 units @ 25
7,000 units @ 30
Inventory, December 31
9,000 units @ ?
Operating expenses
€200,000
Instructions
Prepare a condensed income statement for the year on both bases for
comparative purposes (round to two decimal places).
E8.13 (LO 4) (Inventoriable Costs—Error Adjustments) Werth
Company asks you to review its December 31, 2022, inventory values and
prepare the necessary adjustments to the books. The following information is
given to you.
1. Werth uses the periodic method of recording inventory. A physical count
reveals $234,890 of inventory on hand at December 31, 2022.
2. Not included in the physical count of inventory is $10,420 of merchandise
purchased on December 15 from Browser. This merchandise was shipped

--- Page 677 ---
f.o.b. shipping point on December 29 and arrived in January. The invoice
arrived and was recorded on December 31.
3. Included in inventory is merchandise sold to Bubbey on December 30,
f.o.b. destination. This merchandise was shipped after it was counted. The
invoice was prepared and recorded as a sale on account for $12,800 on
December 31. The merchandise cost $7,350, and Bubbey received it on
January 3.
4. Included in inventory was merchandise received from Dudley on
December 31 with an invoice price of $15,630. The merchandise was
shipped f.o.b. destination. The invoice, which has not yet arrived, has not
been recorded.
5. Not included in inventory is $8,540 of merchandise purchased from
Minsky Industries. This merchandise was received on December 31 after
the inventory had been counted. The invoice was received and recorded on
December 30.
6. Included in inventory was $10,438 of inventory held by Werth on
consignment from Jackel Industries.
7. Included in inventory is merchandise sold to Sims f.o.b. shipping point.
This merchandise was shipped after it was counted. The invoice was
prepared and recorded as a sale for $18,900 on December 31. The cost of
this merchandise was $11,520, and Sims received the merchandise on
January 5.
8. Excluded from inventory was a carton labeled “Please accept for credit.”
This carton contains merchandise costing $1,500 which had been sold to a
customer for $2,600. No entry had been made to the books to reflect the
return, but none of the returned merchandise seemed damaged.
Instructions
a. Determine the proper inventory balance for Werth Company at December
31, 2022.
b. Prepare any correcting entries to adjust inventory and related accounts to
their proper amounts at December 31, 2022. Assume the books have not
been closed.
E8.14 (LO 4) (Inventory Errors—Periodic) Thomason Company makes
the following errors during the current year. (In all cases, assume ending
inventory in the following year is correctly stated.)

--- Page 678 ---
1. Both ending inventory and purchases and related accounts payable are
understated. (Assume this purchase was recorded and paid for in the
following year.)
2. Ending inventory is overstated, but purchases and related accounts
payable are recorded correctly.
3. Ending inventory is correct, but a purchase on account was not recorded.
(Assume this purchase was recorded and paid for in the following year.)
Instructions
Indicate the effect of each of these errors on working capital, current ratio
(assume that the current ratio is greater than 1), retained earnings, and net
income for the current year and the subsequent year.
E8.15 (LO 4) (Inventory Errors) At December 31, 2022, Dwight AG
reported current assets of €390,000 and current liabilities of €200,000. The
following items may have been recorded incorrectly. Dwight uses the periodic
method.
1. Goods purchased costing €22,000 were shipped f.o.b. shipping point by a
supplier on December 28. Dwight received and recorded the invoice on
December 29, 2022, but the goods were not included in Dwight’s physical
count of inventory because they were not received until January 4, 2023.
2. Goods purchased costing €20,000 were shipped f.o.b. destination by a
supplier on December 26. Dwight received and recorded the invoice on
December 31, but the goods were not included in Dwight’s 2022 physical
count of inventory because they were not received until January 2, 2023.
3. Goods held on consignment from Kishi Ltd. were included in Dwight’s
December 31, 2022, physical count of inventory at €13,000.
4. Freight-in of €3,000 was debited to advertising expense on December 28,
2022.
Instructions
a. Compute the current ratio based on Dwight’s statement of financial
position.
b. Recompute the current ratio after corrections are made.
c. By what amount will income (before taxes) be adjusted up or down as a
result of the corrections?

--- Page 679 ---
E8.16 (LO 4) (Inventory Errors) The net income per books of Wu Ltd. was
determined without knowledge of the following errors.
Year Net Income per Books Error in Ending Inventory
2018
HK$50,000 Overstated
HK$ 5,000
2019
52,000 Overstated
9,000
2020
54,000 Understated
11,000
2021
56,000 No error
2022
58,000 Understated
2,000
2023
60,000 Overstated
10,000
Instructions
Prepare a worksheet to show the adjusted net income figure for each of the 6
years after taking into account the inventory errors.
*E8.17 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO and LIFO—Periodic and Perpetual) Inventory
information for Part 311 of Seminole Corp. discloses the following information
for the month of June.
June 1 Balance
300 units @ $10 June 10 Sold 200 units @ $24
11 Purchased 800 units @ $11
15 Sold 500 units @ $25
20 Purchased 500 units @ $13
27 Sold 250 units @ $27
Instructions
a. Assuming that the periodic inventory method is used, compute the cost of
goods sold and ending inventory under (1) LIFO and (2) FIFO.
b. Assuming that the perpetual inventory method is used and costs are
computed at the time of each withdrawal, what is the value of the ending
inventory at LIFO?
c. Assuming that the perpetual inventory method is used and costs are
computed at the time of each withdrawal, what is the gross profit if the
inventory is valued at FIFO?
d. Why is it stated that LIFO usually produces a lower gross profit than
FIFO?
*E8.18 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO, LIFO, and Average-Cost Determination)
Keyser Company’s record of transactions for the month of April is as follows.
Purchases
Sales

--- Page 680 ---
April 1 (balance on hand)
600 @ $6.00 April
3
500 @ $10.00
4
1,500 @ 6.08
9 1,300 @ 10.00
8
800 @ 6.40
11
600 @ 11.00
13
1,200 @ 6.50
23 1,200 @ 11.00
21
700 @ 6.60
27
900 @ 12.00
29
500 @ 6.79
4,500
5,300
Instructions
a. Assuming that periodic inventory records are kept, compute the inventory
at April 30 using (1) LIFO and (2) average-cost.
b. Assuming that perpetual inventory records are kept in both units and
dollars, determine the inventory at April 30 using (1) FIFO and (2) LIFO.
c. Compute cost of goods sold assuming a periodic inventory system and
inventory priced at FIFO.
d. In an inflationary period, which inventory method—FIFO, LIFO, or
average-cost—will show the highest net income?
*E8.19 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO, LIFO, Average-Cost Inventory) Mills Company
was formed on December 1, 2021. The following information is available from
Mills’ inventory records for Product Zone.
Units Unit Cost
January 1, 2022 (beginning inventory)
600
$ 8.00
Purchases:
January 5, 2022
1,100
9.00
January 25, 2022
1,300
10.00
February 16, 2022
800
11.00
March 26, 2022
600
12.00
A physical inventory on March 31, 2022, shows 1,500 units on hand.
Instructions
Assuming Mills uses a periodic system, prepare schedules to compute the
ending inventory at March 31, 2022, under each of the following inventory
methods (round to two decimal places).

--- Page 681 ---
a. FIFO.
b. LIFO.
c. Weighted-average.
*E8.20 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO and LIFO—Periodic and Perpetual) The
following is a record of Cannondale Company’s transactions for Boston
Teapots for the month of May 2022.
May
1 Balance 400 units @ $20
May 10 Sale 300 units @ $38
12 Purchase 600 units @ $25
20 Sale 590 units @ $38
28 Purchase 400 units @ $30
Instructions
a. Assuming that perpetual inventories are not maintained and that a
physical count at the end of the month shows 510 units on hand, what is
the cost of the ending inventory using (1) FIFO and (2) LIFO?
b. Assuming that perpetual records are maintained and they tie into the
general ledger, calculate the ending inventory using (1) FIFO and (2)
LIFO.
*E8.21 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO and LIFO, Income Statement Presentation)
The board of directors of Hayward Corporation is considering whether or not it
should instruct the accounting department to change from a first-in, first-out
(FIFO) basis of pricing inventories to a last-in, first-out (LIFO) basis. The
following information is available.
Sales
20,000 units @ $50
Inventory, January 1
6,000 units @ 20
Purchases
6,000 units @ 22
10,000 units @ 25
7,000 units @ 30
Inventory, December 31
9,000 units @ ?
Operating expenses
$200,000
Instructions
Prepare a condensed income statement for the year on both bases for
comparative purposes.

--- Page 682 ---
*E8.22 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO and LIFO Effects) You are the vice president of
finance of Mickiewicz Corporation, a retail company that prepared two
different schedules of gross margin for the first quarter ended March 31, 2022.
These schedules appear below.
Sales ($5 per unit) Cost of Goods Sold Gross Margin
Schedule 1
$150,000
$124,900
$25,100
Schedule 2
150,000
129,600
20,400
The computation of cost of goods sold in each schedule is based on the
following data.
Units
Cost per Unit Total Cost
Beginning inventory, January 1 10,000
$4.00
$40,000
Purchase, January 10
8,000
4.20
33,600
Purchase, January 30
6,000
4.25
25,500
Purchase, February 11
9,000
4.30
38,700
Purchase, March 17
12,000
4.40
52,800
Peggy Fleming, the president of the company, cannot understand how two
different gross margins can be computed from the same set of data. As the vice
president of finance, you have explained to Ms. Fleming that the two schedules
are based on different assumptions concerning the flow of inventory costs, i.e.,
FIFO and LIFO. Schedules 1 and 2 were not necessarily prepared in this
sequence of cost flow assumptions.
Instructions
Prepare two separate schedules computing cost of goods sold and supporting
schedules showing the composition of the ending inventory under both cost
flow assumptions (assume periodic system).
*E8.23 (LO 3, 5) (FIFO and LIFO—Periodic) Tom Brady Shop began
operations on January 2, 2022. The following stock record card for footballs
was taken from the records at the end of the year.
Date Voucher
Terms
Units
Received
Unit Invoice
Cost
Gross Invoice
Amount
1/15
10624 Net 30
50
$20
$1,000
3/15
11437 1/5, net
30
65
16
1,040
6/20
21332 1/10, net
90
15
1,350

--- Page 683 ---
30
9/12
27644 1/10, net
30
84
12
1,008
11/24
31269
1/10, net
30
76
11
836
Totals
365
$5,234
A physical inventory on December 31, 2022, reveals that 110 footballs were in
stock. The bookkeeper informs you that all the discounts were taken. Assume
that Tom Brady Shop uses the invoice price less discount for recording
purchases.
Instructions
a. Compute the December 31, 2022, inventory using the FIFO method.
(Round all unit costs to two decimal places.)
b. Compute the 2022 cost of goods sold using the LIFO method.
c. What method would you recommend to the owner to minimize income
taxes in 2022, using the inventory information for footballs as a guide?
Problems
P8.1 (LO 3) 
 (Various Inventory Issues) The following
independent situations relate to inventory accounting.
1. Kim Co. purchased goods with a list price of €175,000, subject to two trade
discounts of 20% and 10%, with no cash discounts allowable. How much
should Kim Co. record as the cost of these goods?
2. Keillor Company’s inventory of €1,100,000 at December 31, 2022, was
based on a physical count of goods priced at cost and before any year-end
adjustments relating to the following items.
a. Goods shipped from a vendor f.o.b. shipping point on December 24,
2022, at an invoice cost of €69,000 to Keillor Company were received
on January 4, 2023.
b. The physical count included €29,000 of goods billed to Sakic Corp.
f.o.b. shipping point on December 31, 2022. The carrier picked up
these goods on January 3, 2023.
What amount should Keillor report as inventory on its statement of
financial position?

--- Page 684 ---
3. Zimmerman AG had 1,500 units of part M.O. on hand May 1, 2022, costing
€21 each. Purchases of part M.O. during May were as follows.
Units Unit Cost
May 9 2,000
€22
17 3,500
23
26 1,000
24
A physical count on May 31, 2022, shows 2,000 units of part M.O. on
hand. Using the FIFO method, what is the cost of part M.O. inventory at
May 31, 2022? Using the average-cost method, what is the inventory cost?
4. Donovan AS, a retail store chain, had the following information in its
general ledger for the year 2022.
Merchandise purchased for resale
€909,400
Interest on notes payable to vendors
8,700
Purchase returns
16,500
Freight-in
22,000
Freight-out (delivery expense)
17,100
Cash discounts on purchases
6,800
What is Donovan’s total cost of inventory purchased for 2022?
Instructions
Answer each of the preceding questions about inventories, and explain your
answers.
P8.2 (LO 1, 2) 
 (Inventory Adjustments) Dimitri Company, a
manufacturer of small tools, provided the following information from its
accounting records for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Inventory at December 31, 2022 (based on physical count of goods
in Dimitri’s plant, at cost, on December 31, 2022)
$1,520,000
Accounts payable at December 31, 2022
1,200,000
Net sales (sales less sales returns)
8,150,000
Additional information is as follows.
1. Included in the physical count were tools billed to a customer f.o.b.
shipping point on December 31, 2022. These tools had a cost of $31,000

--- Page 685 ---
and were billed and recorded at $40,000. The shipment was on Dimitri’s
loading dock waiting to be picked up by the common carrier.
2. Goods were in transit from a vendor to Dimitri on December 31, 2022. The
invoice cost was $76,000, and the goods were shipped f.o.b. shipping point
on December 29, 2022.
3. Work in process inventory costing $30,000 was sent to an outside
processor for plating on December 30, 2022.
4. Tools returned by customers and held pending inspection in the returned
goods area on December 31, 2022, were not included in the physical count.
On January 8, 2020, the tools costing $32,000 were inspected and
returned to inventory. Credit memos totaling $47,000 were issued to the
customers on the same date.
5. Tools shipped to a customer f.o.b. destination on December 26, 2022, were
in transit at December 31, 2022, and had a cost of $26,000. Upon
notification of receipt by the customer on January 2, 2023, Dimitri issued
a sales invoice for $42,000.
6. Goods, with an invoice cost of $27,000, received from a vendor at 5:00
p.m. on December 31, 2022, were recorded on a receiving report dated
January 2, 2023. The goods were not included in the physical count, but
the invoice was included in accounts payable at December 31, 2022.
7. Goods received from a vendor on December 26, 2022, were included in the
physical count. However, the related $56,000 vendor invoice was not
included in accounts payable at December 31, 2022, because the accounts
payable copy of the receiving report was lost.
8. On January 3, 2023, a monthly freight bill in the amount of $8,000 was
received. The bill specifically related to merchandise purchased in
December 2022, one-half of which was still in the inventory at December
31, 2022. The freight charges were not included in either the inventory or
in accounts payable at December 31, 2022.
Instructions
Using the following format, prepare a schedule of adjustments as of December
31, 2022, to the initial amounts per Dimitri’s accounting records. Show
separately the effect, if any, of each of the eight transactions on the December
31, 2022, amounts. If the transactions would have no effect on the initial
amount shown, enter NONE.
Inventory Accounts Payable
Net Sales

--- Page 686 ---
Initial amounts
$1,520,000
$1,200,000
$8,150,000
Adjustments—increase (decrease)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Total adjustments
Adjusted amounts
$
$
$
P8.3 (LO 2) (Purchases Recorded Gross and Net) Some of the
transactions of Torres plc during August are listed below. Torres uses the
periodic inventory method.
August
10
Purchased merchandise on account, £12,000, terms 2/10, n/30.
13 Returned part of the purchase of August 10, £1,200, and received
credit on account.
15 Purchased merchandise on account, £16,000, terms 1/10, n/60.
25 Purchased merchandise on account, £20,000, terms 2/10, n/30.
28 Paid invoice of August 15 in full.
Instructions
a. Assuming that purchases are recorded at gross amounts and that
discounts are to be recorded when taken:
1. Prepare general journal entries to record the transactions.
2. Describe how the various items would be shown in the financial
statements.
b. Assuming that purchases are recorded at net amounts and that discounts
lost are treated as financial expenses:
1. Prepare general journal entries to enter the transactions.

--- Page 687 ---
2. Prepare the adjusting entry necessary on August 31 if financial
statements are to be prepared at that time.
3. Describe how the various items would be shown in the financial
statements.
c. Which of the two methods do you prefer and why?
P8.4 (LO 3) (Compute Specific Identification, FIFO, and Average-
Cost) Silva SA’s record of transactions concerning part X for the month of
April was as follows.
Purchases
Sales
April
1 (balance on hand) 100 @ R$5.00 April
5 300
4
400 @
5.10
12 200
11
300 @
5.30
27 800
18
200 @
5.35
28 150
26
600 @
5.60
30
200 @
5.80
Instructions
a. Compute the inventory at April 30 on each of the following bases. Assume
that perpetual inventory records are kept in units only. (Carry unit costs to
the nearest cent.)
1. Specific identification; ending inventory is comprised of 100 units
from beginning inventory and 250 units from the April 26 purchase.
2. First-in, first-out (FIFO).
3. Average-cost.
b. If the perpetual inventory record is kept in dollars, and costs are computed
at the time of each withdrawal, what amount would be shown as ending
inventory in 1, 2, and 3 above? (Carry average unit costs to four decimal
places, and total costs to two decimal places.)
P8.5 (LO 3) (Compute FIFO and Average-Cost) Some of the information
found on a detail inventory card for Cheng Ltd. for the first month of
operations is as follows (¥ amounts in thousands).
Received
Date
No. of Units Unit Cost Issued, No. of Units Balance, No. of Units

--- Page 688 ---
January 2
1,200
¥3.00
1,200
7
700
500
10
600
3.20
1,100
13
500
600
18
1,000
3.30
300
1,300
20
1,100
200
23
1,300
3.40
1,500
26
800
700
28
1,600
3.50
2,300
31
1,300
1,000
Instructions
a. From these data compute the ending inventory on each of the following
bases. Assume that perpetual inventory records are kept in units only.
(Carry unit costs to two decimal places and ending inventory to the nearest
1,000 yen.)
1. First-in, first-out (FIFO).
2. Average-cost.
b. If the perpetual inventory record is kept in yen, and costs are computed at
the time of each withdrawal, would the amounts shown as ending
inventory in 1 and 2 above be the same? Explain and compute.
P8.6 (LO 3) 
 (Compute FIFO and Average-Cost—Periodic
and Perpetual) Ehlo NV is a multiproduct firm. The following is information
concerning one of its products, the Hawkeye.
Date
Transaction
Quantity Price/Cost
1/1
Beginning inventory
1,000
€12
2/4
Purchase
2,000
18
2/20 Sale
2,500
30
4/2
Purchase
3,000
23
11/4 Sale
2,200
33
Instructions
Compute cost of goods sold, assuming Ehlo uses:

--- Page 689 ---
a. Periodic system, FIFO cost flow.
b. Perpetual system, FIFO cost flow.
c. Periodic system, weighted-average cost flow.
d. Perpetual system, moving-average cost flow.
*P8.7 (LO 3, 5) (Compute FIFO, LIFO, and Average-Cost) Ronaldo
Company’s record of transactions concerning part VF5 for the month of
September was as follows.
Purchases
Sales
September 1 (balance on hand) 100 @ $5.00 September 5 300
4
400 @ 5.10
12 200
11
300 @ 5.30
27 800
18
200 @ 5.35
28 150
26
600 @ 5.60
30
200 @ 5.80
Instructions
a. Compute the inventory at September 30 on each of the following bases.
Assume that perpetual inventory records are kept in units only. (Carry unit
costs to the nearest cent.)
1. First-in, first-out (FIFO).
2. Average-cost.
3. Last-in, first-out (LIFO).
b. If the perpetual inventory record is kept in dollars, and costs are computed
at the time of each withdrawal, what amount would be shown as ending
inventory in 1 and 2 above? (Carry average unit costs to four decimal
places.)
*P8.8 (LO 3, 5) (Compute FIFO, LIFO, and Average-Cost) Some of the
information found on a detail inventory card for Slatkin Inc. for the first month
of operations is as follows.
Received
Date
No. of Units Unit Cost Issued, No. of Units Balance, No. of Units
January 2
1,200
$3.00
1,200

--- Page 690 ---
7
700
500
10
600
3.20
1,100
13
500
600
18
1,000
3.30
300
1,300
20
1,100
200
23
1,300
3.40
1,500
26
800
700
28
1,600
3.50
2,300
31
1,300
1,000
Instructions
a. From these data compute the ending inventory on each of the following
bases. Assume that perpetual inventory records are kept in units only.
(Carry unit costs to four decimal places and ending inventory to the
nearest dollar.)
1. First-in, first-out (FIFO).
2. Last-in, first-out (LIFO).
3. Average-cost.
b. If the perpetual inventory record is kept in dollars, and costs are computed
at the time of each withdrawal, would the amounts shown as ending
inventory in 1, 2, and 3 above be the same? Explain and compute.
*P8.9 (LO 3, 5) 
 (Compute FIFO, LIFO, and Average-Cost—
Periodic and Perpetual) Tsui Ltd. is a multiproduct firm. Presented below is
information concerning one of its products, the Jayhawk.
Date
Transaction
Quantity Unit Cost
1/1
Beginning inventory
1,000
NT$12
2/4
Purchase
2,000
18
2/20 Sale
2,500
30
4/2
Purchase
3,000
23
11/4 Sale
2,200
33
Instructions
(Carry unit costs to the nearest cent.)

--- Page 691 ---
Compute cost of goods sold, assuming Tsui uses:
a. Periodic system, FIFO cost flow.
b. Perpetual system, FIFO cost flow.
c. Periodic system, LIFO cost flow.
d. Perpetual system, LIFO cost flow.
e. Periodic system, weighted-average cost flow.
f. Perpetual system, moving-average cost flow.
*P8.10 (LO 3, 5) 
 (Financial Statement Effects of FIFO and
LIFO) The management of Tritt Company has asked its accounting
department to describe the effect upon the company’s financial position and its
income statements of accounting for inventories on the LIFO rather than the
FIFO basis during 2022 and 2023. The accounting department is to assume
that the change to LIFO would have been effective on January 1, 2022, and that
the initial LIFO base would have been the inventory value on December 31,
2021. Presented below are the company’s financial statements and other data
for the years 2022 and 2023 when the FIFO method was employed.
Financial Position as of
12/31/21
12/31/22
12/31/23
Inventory
$120,000
$140,000
$176,000
Other assets
160,000
170,000
200,000
Accounts receivable
80,000
100,000
120,000
Cash
90,000
130,000
154,000
Total assets
$450,000
$540,000
$650,000
Share capital—ordinary
$200,000
$200,000
$200,000
Retained earnings
140,000
200,000
260,000
Accounts payable
40,000
60,000
80,000
Other liabilities
70,000
80,000
110,000
Total equity and liabilities $450,000
$540,000
$650,000
Income for Years Ended
12/31/22
12/31/23
Sales revenue
$900,000
$1,350,000
Less: Cost of goods sold
505,000
756,000

--- Page 692 ---
Other expenses
205,000
304,000
710,000
1,060,000
Income before income taxes
190,000
290,000
Income taxes (40%)
76,000
116,000
Net income
$114,000
$ 174,000
Other data:
1. Inventory on hand at December 31, 2021, consisted of 40,000 units valued
at $3.00 each.
2. Sales (all units sold at the same price in a given year):
2022—150,000 units @ $6.00 each
 2023—180,000 units
@ $7.50 each
3. Purchases (all units purchased at the same price in given year):
2022—150,000 units @ $3.50 each
 2023—180,000 units @
$4.40 each
4. Income taxes at the effective rate of 40% are paid on December 31 each
year.
Instructions
Name the account(s) presented in the financial statements that would have
different amounts for 2023 if LIFO rather than FIFO had been used, and state
the new amount for each account that is named. Show computations.
Concepts for Analysis
CA8.1 (LO 2) (Inventoriable Costs) You are asked to travel to Vienna,
Austria, to observe and verify the inventory of the Vienna branch of one of your
clients. You arrive on Thursday, December 30, and find that the inventory
procedures have just been started. You spot a railway car on the sidetrack at
the unloading door and ask the warehouse superintendent, Buck Rogers, how
he plans to inventory the contents of the car. He responds, “We are not going
to include the contents in the inventory.”
Later in the day, you ask the bookkeeper for the invoice on the carload and the
related freight bill. The invoice lists the various items, prices, and extensions of
the goods in the car. You note that the carload was shipped December 24 from
Berlin, Germany, f.o.b. Berlin, and that the total invoice price of the goods in
the car was €35,300. The freight bill called for a payment of €1,500. Terms

--- Page 693 ---
were net 30 days. The bookkeeper affirms the fact that this invoice is to be held
for recording in January.
Instructions
a. Does your client have a liability that should be recorded at December 31?
Discuss.
b. Prepare a journal entry (or entries) if required, to reflect any accounting
adjustment required. Assume a perpetual inventory system is used by your
client.
c. For what possible reason(s) might your client wish to postpone recording
the transaction?
CA8.2 (LO 2) (Inventoriable Costs) Carlos Beltran, an inventory control
specialist, is interested in improving his understanding of the accounting for
inventories. Although Carlos understands the more sophisticated computer
inventory control systems, he has little knowledge of how inventory cost is
determined. In studying the records of Strider Enterprises, which sells normal
brand-name goods from its own store and on consignment through Chavez SA,
he asks you to answer the following questions.
Instructions
a. Should Strider Enterprises include in its inventory normal brand-name
goods purchased from its suppliers but not yet received if the terms of
purchase are f.o.b. shipping point (manufacturer’s plant)? Why?
b. Should Strider Enterprises include freight-in expenditures as an inventory
cost? Why?
c. If Strider Enterprises purchases its goods on terms 2/10, net 30, should
the purchases be recorded gross or net? Why?
d. What are products on consignment? How should they be reported in the
financial statements?
CA8.3 (LO 2) (Inventoriable Costs) George Solti, the controller for
Garrison Lumber Company, has recently hired you as assistant controller. He
wishes to determine your expertise in the area of inventory accounting and
therefore asks you to answer the following unrelated questions.
a. A company is involved in the wholesaling and retailing of automobile tires
for foreign cars. Most of the inventory is imported, and it is valued on the
company’s records at the actual inventory cost plus freight-in. At year-end,

--- Page 694 ---
the warehousing costs are prorated over cost of goods sold and ending
inventory. Are warehousing costs considered a product cost or a period
cost?
b. A certain portion of a company’s “inventory” is composed of obsolete
items. Should obsolete items that are not currently consumed in the
production of “goods or services to be available for sale” be classified as
part of inventory?
c. A company purchases airplanes for sale to others. However, until they are
sold, the company charters and services the planes. What is the proper way
to report these airplanes in the company’s financial statements?
d. A company wants to buy coal deposits but does not want the financing for
the purchase to be reported on its financial statements. The company
therefore establishes a trust to acquire the coal deposits. The company
agrees to buy the coal over a certain period of time at specified prices. The
trust is able to finance the coal purchase and pay off the loan as it is paid
by the company for the minerals. How should this transaction be
reported?
CA8.4 (LO 2) (Accounting Treatment of Purchase Discounts) Feng
Ltd., a household appliances dealer, purchases its inventories from various
suppliers.
Instructions
Feng is considering alternate methods of accounting for the cash discounts it
takes when paying its suppliers promptly. From a theoretical standpoint,
discuss the acceptability of each of the following methods.
a. Financial income when payments are made.
b. Reduction of cost of goods sold for the period when payments are made.
c. Direct reduction of purchase cost.
CA8.5 (LO 3) 
 (Average-Cost and FIFO) Draft written responses to
the following items.
a. Describe the cost flow assumptions used in average-cost and FIFO
methods of inventory valuation.
b. Distinguish between weighted-average cost and moving-average cost for
inventory costing purposes.

--- Page 695 ---
c. Identify the effects on both the statement of financial position and the
income statement of using the average-cost method instead of the FIFO
method for inventory costing purposes over a substantial time period
when purchase prices of inventoriable items are rising. State why these
effects take place.
CA8.6 (LO 3) 
 (Inventory Choices) Wilkens Company uses the
average-cost method for inventory costing. The company is having a very good
year. In an effort to reduce income in the current year, company president
Lenny Wilkens tells the plant accountant to take the unusual step of
recommending to the purchasing department to make a large purchase of
inventory at year-end. The price of the item to be purchased has nearly doubled
during the year, and the item represents a major portion of inventory value.
Instructions
Answer the following questions.
a. Identify the major stakeholders. If the plant accountant recommends the
purchase, what are the consequences?
b. If Wilkens Company were using the FIFO method of inventory costing,
would Lenny Wilkens give the same order? Why or why not?
Using Your Judgment
Financial Statement Analysis Cases
Case 1: Lumber Supply ASA
Lumber Supply ASA is a manufacturer of specialty building products. The
company, through its partnership in the Trus Joist MacMillan joint venture,
develops and manufactures engineered lumber. This product is a high-quality
substitute for structural lumber, and uses lower-grade wood and materials
formerly considered waste. The company also is majority owner of the Outlook
Window Partnership, which is a consortium of three wood and vinyl window
manufacturers.
Shown below is Lumber Supply’s adapted income statement and information
concerning inventories from its statement of financial position.
Lumber Supply ASA
Current Year
Sales revenue
€618,876,000
Cost of goods sold
475,476,000

--- Page 696 ---
Gross profit
143,400,000
Selling and administrative expenses
102,112,000
Income from operations
41,288,000
Other expense
24,712,000
Income before income taxes
16,576,000
Income taxes
7,728,000
Net income
€ 8,848,000
Inventories. Inventories are valued at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable
value and include material, labor, and production overhead costs. Inventories
consisted of the following:
Current Year
Prior Year
Finished goods
€27,512,000 €23,830,000
Raw materials and work in progress
34,363,000
33,244,000
61,875,000
57,074,000
Reduction to average-cost
(5,263,000)
(3,993,000)
€56,612,000 €53,081,000
The average-cost (AC) method is used for determining the cost of lumber,
veneer, Microllam lumber, LSI joists, and open web joists. Approximately 35
percent of total inventories at the end of the current year were valued using the
AC method. The first-in, first-out (FIFO) method is used to determine the cost
of all other inventories.
Instructions
a. How much would income before taxes have been if FIFO costing had been
used to value all inventories?
b. If the income tax rate is 46.6%, (1) what would the income tax have been if
FIFO costing had been used to value all inventories? (2) What is the
difference in net income between the two methods? (3) In your opinion, is
this difference in net income between the two methods material? Explain.
c. Does the use of a different costing system for different types of inventory
mean that there is a different physical flow of goods among the different
types of inventory? Explain.
Case 2: Noven Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

--- Page 697 ---
Noven Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (USA), headquartered in Miami, Florida,
describes itself in a recent annual report as follows.
Noven Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Noven is a place of ideas—a company where scientific excellence and state-
of-the-art manufacturing combine to create new answers to human needs.
Our transdermal delivery systems speed drugs painlessly and effortlessly
into the bloodstream by means of a simple skin patch. This technology has
proven applications in estrogen replacement, but at Noven we are
developing a variety of systems incorporating bestselling drugs that fight
everything from asthma, anxiety and dental pain to cancer, heart disease
and neurological illness. Our research portfolio also includes new
technologies, such as iontophoresis, in which drugs are delivered through
the skin by means of electrical currents, as well as products that could
satisfy broad consumer needs, such as our anti-microbial mouthrinse.
Noven also reported in its annual report that its activities to date have
consisted of product development efforts, some of which have been
independent and some of which have been completed in conjunction with
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer (RPR) (FRA) and Ciba-Geigy, now part of
Novartis (CHE). The revenues so far have consisted of money received from
licensing fees, “milestone” payments (payments made under licensing
agreements when certain stages of the development of a certain product have
been completed), and interest on its investments. The company expects that it
will have significant revenue in the upcoming fiscal year from the launch of its
first product, a transdermal estrogen delivery system.
The current assets portion of Noven’s statement of financial position follows.
Cash and cash equivalents
$12,070,272
Investment securities
23,445,070
Inventory of supplies
1,264,553
Prepaid and other current assets
825,159
Total current assets
$37,605,054
Inventory of supplies is recorded at the lower-of-cost (first-in, first-out)-or-net
realizable value and consists mainly of supplies for research and development.
Instructions
a. What would you expect the physical flow of goods for a pharmaceutical
manufacturer to be most like, FIFO or random (flow of goods does not
follow a set pattern)? Explain.

--- Page 698 ---
b. What are some of the factors that Noven should consider as it selects an
inventory costing method?
c. Suppose that Noven had $49,000 in an inventory of transdermal estrogen
delivery patches. These patches are from an initial production run, and will
be sold during the coming year. Why do you think that this amount is not
shown in a separate inventory account? In which of the accounts shown is
the inventory likely to be? At what point will the inventory be transferred
to a separate inventory account?
*Case 3: SUPERSTORE
SUPERSTORE reported that its inventory turnover decreased from 17.1 times
in 2022 to 15.8 times in 2023. The following data appear in SUPERSTORE’s
annual report.
Feb. 26, 2021 Feb. 25, 2022 Feb. 24, 2023
Total revenues
$19,543
$19,864
$37,406
Cost of sales (using LIFO)
16,681
16,977
29,267
Year-end inventories using FIFO
1,181
1,114
2,927
Year-end inventories using LIFO
1,032
954
2,749
a. Compute SUPERSTORE’s inventory turnovers for 2022 and 2023 using:
1. Cost of sales and LIFO inventory.
2. Cost of sales and FIFO inventory.
b. Some firms calculate inventory turnover using sales rather than cost of
goods sold in the numerator. Calculate SUPERSTORE’s 2022 and 2023
turnover using:
1. Sales and LIFO inventory.
2. Sales and FIFO inventory.
c. Describe the method that SUPERSTORE appears to use.
d. State which method you would choose to evaluate SUPERSTORE’s
performance. Justify your choice.
Accounting, Analysis, and Principles
Englehart Ltd. sells two types of pumps. One is large and is for commercial use.
The other is smaller and is used in residential swimming pools. The following
inventory data is available for the month of March.

--- Page 699 ---
Units Price per Unit
Total
Residential Pumps
Inventory at Feb. 28
200
£ 400 £ 80,000
Purchases:
March 10
500
£ 450 £225,000
March 20
400
£ 475 £190,000
March 30
300
£ 500 £150,000
Sales:
March 15
500
£ 540 £270,000
March 25
400
£ 570 £228,000
Inventory at Mar. 31
500
Commercial Pumps
Inventory at Feb. 28
600
£ 800 £480,000
Purchases:
March 3
600
£ 900 £540,000
March 12
300
£ 950 £285,000
March 21
500
£1,000 £500,000
Sales:
March 18
900
£1,080 £972,000
March 29
600
£1,140 £684,000
Inventory at Mar. 31
500
Accounting
a. Assuming Englehart uses a periodic inventory system, determine the cost
of inventory on hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March
under first-in, first-out (FIFO).
b. Assume Englehart uses average-cost. Determine the cost of inventory on
hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March.
Analysis
a. Assume you need to compute a current ratio for Englehart. Which
inventory cost flow assumption (FIFO or average-cost) do you think would
give you a more meaningful current ratio?

--- Page 700 ---
b. Some of Englehart’s competitors use average-cost inventory costing and
some use FIFO. How can an analyst compare the results of companies in
an industry when some use average-cost and others use FIFO?
Principles
a. Can companies change from one inventory accounting method to another?
If a company changes to an inventory accounting method used by most of its
competitors, what are the trade-offs in terms of the Conceptual Framework
discussed in Chapter 2 of the text?
*b. If a U.S. company decides to adopt IFRS, what inventory cost flow
assumption could it choose from?
Bridge to the Profession
Authoritative Literature References
[1] IFRS 15: Revenue from Contracts with Customers (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Board Foundation, 2014), par. 34, B64–
B76.
[2] IFRS 15: Revenue from Contracts with Customers (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Board Foundation, 2014), par. 55, B20–
B27.
[3] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 11.
[4] International Accounting Standard 41, Agriculture (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[5] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 20.
[6] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 16.
[7] International Accounting Standard 23, Borrowing Costs (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001).
[8] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 11.
[9] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras. 23–
25.

--- Page 701 ---
[10] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), par. 25.
[11] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras.
BC9–BC10.
[12] International Accounting Standard 2, Inventories (London, U.K.:
International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, 2001), paras.
BC13–BC14.
Research Case
In conducting year-end inventory counts, your audit team is debating the
impact of the client’s right of return policy both on inventory valuation and
revenue recognition. The assistant controller argues that there is no need to
worry about the return policies since they have not changed in a while. The
audit senior wants a more authoritative answer and has asked you to conduct
some research of the authoritative literature before she presses the point with
the client.
Instructions
Access the IFRS authoritative literature at the IFRS website (you may register
for free IFRS access at this site). When you have accessed the documents, you
can use the search tool in your Internet browser to respond to the following
questions. (Provide paragraph citations if necessary.)
a. Which statement addresses revenue recognition when right of return
exists?
b. When is this statement important for a company?
c. Sales with rights of return can ultimately cause inventory to be misstated.
Why are returns allowed? Should different industries be able to make
different types of return policies?
d. In what situations would a reasonable estimate of returns be difficult to
make?
Notes
1 Some companies have developed methods of determining inventories,
including statistical sampling, that are sufficiently reliable to make
unnecessary an annual physical count of each item of inventory.

--- Page 702 ---
2 As indicated in Chapter 7, Lululemon recognized accounts receivable and
sales revenue when it transferred control of its yoga outfit to its customer,
Jennifer Burian.
3 A separate IFRS addresses the accounting for agricultural inventories. [4]
According to IFRS, agricultural inventories, such as wheat, oranges, etc., are
recorded at their fair value less estimated selling costs at the point of
harvest. This measure is deemed to be cost for purposes of applying the
IFRS for inventory. [5]
4 Companies should not record abnormal freight, handling costs, and
amounts of wasted materials (spoilage) as inventory costs. If the costs
associated with the actual level of spoilage or product defects are greater
than the costs associated with normal spoilage or defects, the company
should charge the excess as an expense in the current period. [6]
5 The reporting rules related to interest cost capitalization have their greatest
impact in accounting for non-current assets. We therefore discuss them in
Chapter 10.
6 The motion picture industry provides a good illustration of the cost allocation
problem. Often actors receive a percentage of net income for a given movie
or television program. Some actors, however, have alleged that their
programs have been extremely profitable to the motion picture studios but
that they have received little in the way of profit-sharing. Actors contend
that the studios allocate additional costs to successful projects to avoid
sharing profits.
7 IAS 2 indicates that a company should use the same inventory method for all
inventories having a similar nature and use. When inventories have a
different nature or use, then a different inventory method may be justified.
[10]
8 A method which is used extensively in the United States is the last-in, first-
out (LIFO) method. Under IFRS, LIFO is not permitted for financial
reporting purposes because the IASB states it does not provide a reliable
representation of actual inventory flow. [11] Appendix 8A discusses the
basics of the LIFO method. A discussion of special issues related to the
LIFO method is available in WileyPLUS.

--- Page 703 ---
