CHAPTER 15
Equity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
2. Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
3. Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
4. Indicate how to present and analyze equity.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are integral to the
topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 15
As the following opening story indicates, the growth of global equity capital markets indicates that
investors around the world need useful information. In this chapter, we explain the accounting
issues related to the equity of a corporation. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows.
It’s a Global Market
As mentioned in prior chapters, we are moving toward one set of global financial reporting standards
and one “common language” for financial information. This change will probably lead to greater
consolidation of our capital markets. To understand how quickly the global financial world is changing,
let’s examine a few trends occurring on securities exchanges around the world.
In 2007, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) merged with Paris-based Euronext, creating the world’s
first transatlantic securities exchange. NYSE Euronext is the world’s largest exchange group, with
more than 8,000 listed issuers representing over one-third of global equity trading. Similarly,
NASDAQ, the world’s largest electronic securities market, merged with OMX, the Nordic securities
market operator. This electronic exchange operates in 29 countries, on six continents, and has over
3,000 listed issuers, with a market value of approximately $8.5 trillion. Further exchange consolidation
occurred in 2013, when Intercontinental Exchange merged with NYSE.
Another reason for the movement toward international financial reporting standards can be found in
recent initial public offerings (IPOs). For example, total global IPO listings, as well as regional
percentages, were as follows.

As indicated, global stock listings have been on the rise, and listings in Asia-Pacific continue to be the
biggest share of IPOs.
Proceeds in Asia were bolstered by the debut of China’s STAR Market in 2019.
Europe-Middle East was the second highest grossing sector, steadily increasing from 2016 to 2018,
recovering from the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the European Union.
Another indicator of globalization is provided by a review of the world’s largest companies, in terms of
revenues and profits as shown in the following table.
Top 10 of the Fortune Global 500
Rank
Company
Revenues (in USD millions) Profits (in USD millions)
Walmart (USA)
Sinopec Group (CHN)
Royal Dutch Shell (NDL/GBR)
China National Petroleum (CHN)
State Grid (CHN)
Saudi Aramco (SAU)
BP (GBR)
ExxonMobil (USA)
Volkswagen (DEU)
10 Toyota (JPN)
Sources: Adapted from L. Ventura, “World’s Largest Companies 2019,” Global Finance (August 29, 2019).
The richest companies in the world by revenue are Walmart (USA), petroleum and chemical
corporation Sinopec (CHN), and Royal Dutch Shell (NDL/GBR). If these companies generate more
sales, why do stock investors prefer to pour money into tech companies and startups? Because—unlike
established companies—tech upstarts have a much greater potential for growth. That said, with seven
different countries represented in the top 10 of the Fortune Global 500, it really is a global market, and
investors should take care not to avoid these global investment opportunities.

Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted summary review
and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with annotated solutions, as well
as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Corporate Capital
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
Of the three primary forms of business organization—the proprietorship, the partnership, and
the corporation—the corporate form dominates. The corporation is by far the leader in terms of the
aggregate amount of resources controlled, goods and services produced, and people employed.
Although the corporate form has a number of advantages (as well as disadvantages) over the other two
forms, its principal benefit is its facility for attracting and accumulating large amounts of capital.
Corporate Form
The special characteristics of the corporate form that affect accounting include:
1. Influence of corporate law.
2. Use of the share system.
3. Development of a variety of ownership interests.
Corporate Law
Anyone who wishes to establish a corporation must generally submit articles of incorporation to
the appropriate governmental agency for the country in which incorporation is desired. After fulfilling
requirements, the governmental agency issues a corporation charter, thereby recognizing the company
as a legal entity. Regardless of the number of countries in which a corporation has operating divisions,
it is incorporated in only one country. It is to the company’s advantage to incorporate where laws favor
the corporate form of business organization.
Many governments have their own business incorporation acts. The accounting for equity follows the
provisions of these acts. In many cases, the laws are complex and vary both in their provisions and in
their definitions of certain terms. Some laws fail to define technical terms. As a result, terms often
have one meaning in one country and another meaning in a different country. These problems may be
further compounded because legal authorities often interpret the effects and restrictions of the laws
differently.
Share System
Equity in a corporation generally consists of a large number of units or shares. Within a given class of
shares, each share exactly equals every other share. The number of shares possessed determines each
owner’s interest. If a company has ordinary shares divided into 1,000 shares, a person who owns 500
shares controls one-half of the ownership interest. One holding 10 shares has a one-hundredth
interest.
Each share has certain rights and privileges. Only by special contract can a company restrict these
rights and privileges at the time it issues the shares. Owners must examine the articles of
incorporation, the share certificates, and the provisions of applicable laws to ascertain such restrictions
on or variations from the standard rights and privileges. In the absence of restrictive provisions, each
share carries the following rights:

1. To share proportionately in profits and losses.
2. To share proportionately in management (the right to vote for directors).
3. To share proportionately in corporate assets upon liquidation.
4. To share proportionately in any new issues of shares of the same class—called the preemptive
right.1
The first three rights are self-explanatory. The last right is used to protect each shareholder’s
proportional interest in the company. The preemptive right protects an existing shareholder
from involuntary dilution of ownership interest. Without this right, shareholders might find
their interest reduced by the issuance of additional shares without their knowledge and at prices
unfavorable to them. However, many corporations have eliminated the preemptive right. Why?
Because this right makes it inconvenient for corporations to issue large amounts of additional shares,
as they frequently do in acquiring other companies.
The share system easily allows one individual to transfer an interest in a company to another investor.
For example, individuals owning shares in Páo de Acucar (BRA) may sell them to others at any
time and at any price without obtaining the consent of the company or other
shareholders. Each share is personal property of the owner, who may dispose of it at will. Páo de
Acucar simply maintains a list or subsidiary ledger of shareholders as a guide to dividend payments,
issuance of share rights, voting proxies, and the like. Because owners freely and frequently transfer
shares, Páo de Acucar must revise the subsidiary ledger of shareholders periodically, generally in
advance of every dividend payment or shareholders’ meeting.
In addition, the major securities exchanges require ownership controls that the typical corporation
finds uneconomic to provide. Thus, corporations often use registrars and transfer agents who
specialize in performing services for recording and transferring shares.
Variety of Ownership Interests
In every corporation, one class of shares must represent the basic ownership interest. That class of
shares is called ordinary. Ordinary shares represent the residual corporate interest that bears the
ultimate risks of loss and receives the benefits of success. They are guaranteed neither dividends nor
assets upon dissolution. But ordinary shareholders generally control the management of the
corporation and tend to profit most if the company is successful. In the event that a corporation has
only one authorized issue of shares, that issue is by definition ordinary shares, whether so designated
in the charter or not.
In an effort to broaden investor appeal, corporations may offer two or more classes of shares, each with
different rights or privileges. In the preceding section, we pointed out that each share of a given issue
has the same four inherent rights as other shares of the same issue. By special contracts between the
corporation and its shareholders, however, the shareholder may sacrifice certain of these rights in
return for other special rights or privileges. Thus special classes of shares, usually called preference
shares, are created. In return for any special preference, the preference shareholder always sacrifices
some of the inherent rights of ordinary shareholders.
A common type of preference is to give preference shareholders a prior claim on earnings. The
corporation thus assures them a dividend, usually at a stated rate, before it distributes any amount to
the ordinary shareholders. In return for this preference, the preference shareholders may sacrifice
their right to a voice in management and/or their right to share in profits beyond the stated rate.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
A Class (B) Act
Some companies grant preferences to different shareholders by issuing different classes of
ordinary shares. For a family-controlled company, issuing newer classes of lower or non-voting
shares (referred to as B shares) effectively creates currency for acquisitions, increases liquidity, or
puts a public value on the company without diluting the family’s powers. For example, the B
shareholders at Vodafone (GBR) only get a vote if the company is to be dissolved. The following
are some notable companies with two-tiered shares.
Company
Votes Controlled by Class B Shareholders
Vodafone (GBR)
0%
Alphabet (USA)
Under Armour (USA)
Air Canada (CAN)
(Only Canadian citizens can vote)
Facebook (USA)
Bombardier (CAN)
0%
Some trading exchanges impose rules to protect non-controlling investors. For example, the
Financial Times Stock Exchange (FTSE) requires family owners to hold no more than 50 percent
of voting shares. For many retail investors, voting rights are not that important. But, investors
must carefully compare the apparent bargain prices for some classes of shares—they may end up
as second-class citizens with no voting rights.
Sources: Data from R. Sullivan, “Dual Share Structure Goes Under Spotlight,” Financial Times (November 1, 2011); M.
Gottfried, “A Double-Digit Return Is Hiding in Plain Sight at Under Armour: The Yawning Gap Between Under Armour’s Voting
and Nonvoting Shares Offers an Opportunity,” Wall Street Journal (November 28, 2016); and D. Shultz, “What Are Non-Voting
Shares?” danashultz.com/2019/03/15/non-voting-shares (March 15, 2019).
Components of Equity
Equity is the residual interest in the assets of the company after deducting all liabilities. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) Equity is often referred to as
shareholders’ equity, stockholders’ equity, or corporate capital. Equity is often subclassified on the
statement of financial position into the following categories (as discussed in Chapter 5).
1. Share capital.
2. Share premium.
3. Retained earnings.
4. Accumulated other comprehensive income.
5. Treasury shares.
6. Non-controlling interest.
Such classifications help financial statement users to better understand the legal or other restrictions
related to the ability of the company to pay dividends or otherwise use its equity for certain defined
purposes.
Companies often make a distinction between contributed capital (paid-in capital) and earned capital.
Contributed (paid-in) capital is the total amount paid in on capital shares—the amount provided
by shareholders to the corporation for use in the business. Contributed capital includes items such as
the par value of all outstanding shares and premiums less discounts on issuance. Earned capital is

the capital that develops from profitable operations. It consists of all undistributed income that
remains invested in the company. Retained earnings represents the earned capital of the company.
As indicated above, equity is a residual interest and therefore its value is derived from the amount of
the corporations’ assets and liabilities (see Underlying Concepts). Only in unusual cases will a
company’s equity equal the total fair value of its shares. For example, BMW (DEU) recently had total
equity of €58,088 million and a market capitalization of €53,560 million. BMW’s equity represents the
net contributions from shareholders (from both controlling and non-controlling shareholders) plus
retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive income. As a residual interest, its equity has
no existence apart from the assets and liabilities of BMW—equity equals net assets. Equity is not a
claim to specific assets but a claim against a portion of the total assets. Its amount is not specified or
fixed; it depends on BMW’s profitability. Equity grows if the company is profitable. It shrinks, or may
disappear entirely, if BMW loses money.
Underlying Concepts
According to the Conceptual Framework, equity is defined as a residual, based on the net of assets
minus liabilities.
Issuance of Shares
In issuing shares, companies follow these procedures. First, the applicable governmental agency must
authorize the shares, generally in a certificate of incorporation or charter. Next, the corporation offers
shares for sale, entering into contracts to sell these shares. Then, after receiving amounts for the
shares, the corporation issues the shares. The corporation generally makes no entry in the general
ledger accounts when it receives its share authorization from the jurisdiction of incorporation.
We discuss the accounting problems involved in the issuance of shares under the following topics.
1. Accounting for par value shares.
2. Accounting for no-par shares.
3. Accounting for shares issued in combination with other securities (lump-sum sales).
4. Accounting for shares issued in non-cash transactions.
5. Accounting for costs of issuing shares.
Par Value Shares
The par value of a share has no relationship to its fair value. At present, the par value associated with
most ordinary share issuances is very low. For example, par value for China Railway Construction
Corporation (CHN) is ¥1.00, and for Nestlé S.A. (CHE), it is CHF1. Low par values help companies
avoid the contingent liability associated with shares sold below par.2
To show the required information for issuance of par value shares, corporations maintain accounts for
each class of shares as follows.
1. Preference Shares or Ordinary Shares. Together, these two share accounts reflect the par
value of the corporation’s issued shares. The company credits these accounts when it originally
issues the shares. It makes no additional entries in these accounts unless it issues additional
shares or retires them.
2. Share Premium. The Share Premium account indicates any excess over par value paid in by
shareholders in return for the shares issued to them. Once paid in, the excess over par becomes a
part of the corporation’s share premium. The individual shareholder has no greater claim on the
excess paid in than all other holders of the same class of shares.

No-Par Shares
Many countries permit the issuance of shares without par value, called no-par shares. The reasons
for issuance of no-par shares are twofold. First, issuance of no-par shares avoids the contingent
liability (see footnote 2) that might occur if the corporation issued par value shares at a discount.
Second, some confusion exists over the relationship (or rather the absence of a relationship) between
the par value and fair value. If shares have no par value, the questionable treatment of using par
value as a basis for fair value never arises. This is particularly advantageous whenever issuing
shares for items such as tangible or intangible fixed assets.
A major disadvantage of no-par shares is that some countries levy a high tax on these issues. In
addition, in some countries the total issue price for no-par shares may be considered legal capital,
which could reduce the flexibility in paying dividends.
Corporations sell no-par shares, like par value shares, for whatever price they will bring. However,
unlike par value shares, corporations issue them without a premium or a discount. The exact amount
received represents the credit to ordinary or preference shares. For example, Video Electronics AG is
organized with 10,000 ordinary shares authorized without par value. Video Electronics makes only a
memorandum entry for the authorization, inasmuch as no amount is involved. If Video Electronics
then issues 500 shares for cash at €10 per share, it makes the following entry:
Cash
Share Capital—Ordinary
If it issues another 500 shares for €11 per share, Video Electronics makes this entry:
Cash
Share Capital—Ordinary
True no-par shares should be carried in the accounts at issue price without any share
premium reported. But some countries require that no-par shares have a stated value. The stated
value is a minimum value below which a company cannot issue the shares; instead of being no-par
shares, such stated-value shares become, in effect, shares with a very low par value. Therefore, such
shares are open to all the criticism and abuses that first encouraged the development of no-par shares.
If no-par shares have a stated value of €5 per share but sell for €11, all amounts in excess of €5 are
recorded as share premium, which in many jurisdictions is fully or partially available for dividends.
Thus, no-par shares with a low stated value permit a new corporation to commence its operations with
share premium that may exceed its stated capital. For example, if a company issues 1,000 of the shares
with a €5 stated value at €15 per share for cash, it makes the following entry.
Cash
Share Capital—Ordinary
Share Premium—Ordinary
Most corporations account for no-par shares with a stated value as if they were par value shares with
par equal to the stated value.
Shares Issued with Other Securities (Lump-Sum Sales)
Generally, corporations sell classes of shares separately from one another. The reason to do so is to
track the proceeds relative to each class as well as relative to each lot. Occasionally, a corporation
issues two or more classes of securities for a single payment or lump sum, in the acquisition of another
company. The accounting problem in such lump-sum sales is how to allocate the proceeds among the
several classes of securities. Companies use one of two methods of allocation: (1) the proportional
method and (2) the incremental method.

Proportional Method
If the fair value or other sound basis for determining relative value is available for each class of
security, the company allocates the lump sum received among the classes of securities on a
proportional basis. Illustration 15.1 presents an example of the proportional method.
Proportional Method for Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance
Facts: Miller Company issues 1,000 shares of $10 stated value ordinary shares having a fair value of
$20 per share, and 1,000 shares of $10 par value preference shares having a fair value of $12 per
share, for a lump sum of $30,000.
Question: How should Miller Company allocate the proceeds between ordinary and
preference shares under the proportional method?
Solution: Miller allocates the $30,000 to the two classes of shares as follows.
Fair value of ordinary (1,000 × $20) = $20,000
Fair value of preference (1,000 × $12) = 
Aggregate fair value 
Allocated to ordinary: 
× $30,000 = $18,750
Allocated to preference: 
× $30,000 = $11,250
Total allocation 
ILLUSTRATION 15.1 Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance—Proportional
Method
Incremental Method
In instances where a company cannot determine the fair value of all classes of securities, it may use
the incremental method. It uses the fair value of the securities as a basis for those classes that it
knows, and allocates the remainder of the lump sum to the class for which it does not know the fair
value. Illustration 15.2 presents an example of the incremental method.

Incremental Method for Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance
Facts: Hogan Company issues 1,000 shares of $10 stated value ordinary shares having a fair value of
$20 per share, and 1,000 shares of $10 par value preference shares having no established fair value,
for a lump sum of $30,000.
Question: How should Hogan Company allocate the proceeds between ordinary and
preference shares under the incremental method?
Solution: Hogan allocates the $30,000 to the two classes of shares as follows.
Lump-sum receipt
Allocated to ordinary (1,000 × $20) (20,000)
Balance allocated to preference
ILLUSTRATION 15.2 Allocation in Lump-Sum Securities Issuance—Incremental
Method
If a company cannot determine the fair value for any of the classes of shares involved in a
lump-sum exchange, it may need to use other approaches. In this situation, the company may
rely on an expert’s appraisal. Or, if the company knows that one or more of the classes of securities
issued will have a determinable fair value in the near future, it may use a best-estimate basis with the
intent to adjust later upon establishment of the future fair value.
Shares Issued in Non-Cash Transactions
Accounting for the issuance of shares for property or services involves an issue of valuation. The
general rule is that companies should record shares issued for services or property other
than cash at the fair value of the goods or services received, unless that fair value cannot
be measured reliably. If the fair value of the goods or services cannot be measured
reliably, use the fair value of the shares issued. [2]
If a company can readily determine both and the transaction results from an arm’s-length exchange,
there will probably be little difference in their fair values. In such cases, the basis for valuing the
exchange should not matter.
If a company cannot readily determine either the fair value of the shares it issues or the property or
services it receives, it should employ an appropriate valuation technique. Depending on available data,
the valuation may be based on market transactions involving comparable assets or the use of
discounted expected future cash flows. Companies should avoid the use of book, par, or stated values
as a basis of valuation for these transactions.
A company may exchange unissued shares or treasury shares (issued shares that it has reacquired but
not retired) for property or services. If it uses treasury shares and the fair value of the property or
services cannot be reliably estimated, the cost of the treasury shares should not be considered the
decisive factor in establishing the fair value of the property or services. Instead, it should use the fair
value of the treasury shares to value the property or services.
The series of transactions shown in Illustration 15.3 indicate the procedure for recording the
issuance of 10,000 shares of €10 par value ordinary shares for a patent for Marlowe SA, in various
circumstances.
Generally, the board of directors has the power to set the value of non-cash transactions. However,
boards sometimes abuse this power. The issuance of shares for property or services has resulted in
cases of overstated corporate capital through intentional overvaluation of the property or services

received. The overvaluation of equity resulting from inflated asset values creates watered shares. The
corporation should eliminate the “water” by simply writing down the overvalued assets.
If, as a result of the issuance of shares for property or services, a corporation undervalues the recorded
assets, it creates secret reserves. An understated corporate structure (secret reserve) may also result
from other methods: excessive depreciation or amortization charges, expensing capital expenditures,
excessive write-downs of inventories or receivables, or any other understatement of assets or
overstatement of liabilities. An example of a liability overstatement is an excessive provision for
estimated product warranties that ultimately results in an understatement of equity, thereby creating a
secret reserve.
ILLUSTRATION 15.3 Issuance of Shares for Patent
Costs of Issuing Shares
When a company like Wesfarmers (AUS) issues shares, it should report direct costs incurred to sell
shares, such as underwriting costs, accounting and legal fees, printing costs, and taxes, as a reduction
of the amounts paid in. Wesfarmers therefore debits issue costs to Share Premium because they are
unrelated to corporate operations. In effect, issue costs are a cost of financing. As such, issue costs
should reduce the proceeds received from the sale of the shares.
Wesfarmers should expense management salaries and other indirect costs related to the share issue
because it is difficult to establish a relationship between these costs and the sale proceeds. In addition,
Wesfarmers expenses recurring costs, primarily registrar and transfer agents’ fees, as incurred.
Preference Shares
As noted earlier, preference shares are a special class of shares that possess certain preferences or
features not possessed by ordinary shares. The following features are those most often associated with
preference share issues.
1. Preference as to dividends.
2. Preference as to assets in the event of liquidation.

3. Convertible into ordinary shares.
4. Callable at the option of the corporation.
5. Non-voting.
The features that distinguish preference shares from ordinary shares may be of a more restrictive and
negative nature. For example, the preference shares may be non-voting, non-cumulative, and non-
participating.
Companies usually issue preference shares with a par value, expressing the dividend preference as a
percentage of the par value. Thus, holders of 8 percent preference shares with a $100 par value are
entitled to an annual dividend of $8 per share ($100 × .08). This share is commonly referred to as an 8
percent preference share. In the case of no-par preference shares, a corporation expresses a dividend
preference as a specific dollar amount per share, for example, $7 per share. This share is commonly
referred to as a $7 preference share.
A preference as to dividends does not assure the payment of dividends. It merely assures that the
corporation must pay the stated dividend rate or amount applicable to the preference shares before
paying any dividends on the ordinary shares.
A company often issues preference shares (instead of debt) because of a high debt to equity ratio. In
other instances, it issues preference shares through private placements with other corporations at a
lower-than-market dividend rate because the acquiring corporation often receives largely tax-free
dividends in certain countries.
Features of Preference Shares
A company may attach whatever preferences or restrictions, in whatever combination it desires, to a
preference share issue, as long as it does not specifically violate its country’s incorporation law. Also, it
may issue more than one class of preference shares. We discuss the most common features attributed
to preference shares below.
Cumulative Preference Shares
Cumulative preference shares require that if a company fails to pay a dividend in any year, it must
make it up in a later year before paying any dividends to ordinary shareholders. If the directors fail to
declare a dividend at the normal date for dividend action, the dividend is said to have been “passed.”
Any passed dividend on cumulative preference shares constitutes a dividend in arrears. Because no
liability exists until the board of directors declares a dividend, a corporation does not record a dividend
in arrears as a liability but discloses it in a note to the financial statements. A corporation seldom
issues non-cumulative preference shares because a passed dividend is lost forever to the preference
shareholder. As a result, this type of share issue would be less marketable.
Participating Preference Shares
Holders of participating preference shares share ratably with the ordinary shareholders in any
profit distributions beyond the prescribed rate. That is, 5 percent preference shares, if fully
participating, will receive not only a 5 percent return, but also dividends at the same rates as those paid
to ordinary shareholders if paying amounts in excess of 5 percent of par or stated value to ordinary
shareholders. Note that some participating preference shares are only partially participating.
Convertible Preference Shares
Convertible preference shares give the preference shareholders the option to exchange preference
shares for ordinary shares at a predetermined ratio. The convertible preference shareholder not only

enjoys a preference claim on dividends but also has the option to convert to an ordinary shareholder
with unlimited participation in earnings.
Callable Preference Shares
Callable preference shares permit the company at its option to call or redeem the outstanding
preference shares at specified future dates and at stipulated prices. Many preference issues are callable.
The company usually sets the call or redemption price slightly above the original issuance price and
commonly states it in terms related to the par value. The callable feature permits the company to use
the capital obtained through the issuance of such shares until the need has passed or it is no longer
advantageous.
The existence of a call price or prices tends to set a ceiling on the market price of the preference shares
unless they are convertible into ordinary shares. When a company redeems preference shares, it must
pay any dividends in arrears.
Redeemable Preference Shares
Recently, more and more issuances of preference shares have features that make the securities more
like debt (legal obligation to pay) than an equity instrument. For example, redeemable preference
shares have a mandatory redemption period or a redemption feature that the issuer cannot control.
Previously, public companies were not permitted to report these debt-like preference share issues in
equity, but they were not required to report them as a liability either. There were concerns about
classification of these debt-like securities, which may have been reported as equity or in the
“mezzanine” section of statements of financial position between equity and debt. There also was
diversity in practice as to how dividends on these securities were reported. IFRS requires debt-like
securities, like redeemable preference shares, to be classified as liabilities and to be measured and
accounted similarly to liabilities. [3]
Accounting for and Reporting of Preference Shares
The accounting for preference shares at issuance is similar to that for ordinary shares. A company
allocates proceeds between the par value of the preference shares and share premium. To illustrate,
assume that Bishop plc issues 10,000 shares of £10 par value preference shares for £12 cash per share.
Bishop records the issuance as follows.
Cash
Share Capital—Preference
Share Premium—Preference
Thus, Bishop maintains separate accounts for these different classes of shares.
Companies consider convertible preference shares as a part of equity. In addition, when exercising
convertible preference shares, there is no theoretical justification for recognition of a gain or loss. A
company recognizes no gain or loss when dealing with shareholders in their capacity as business
owners. Instead, the company employs the book value method: debit Share Capital—Preference,
along with any related Share Premium—Preference; credit Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium
—Ordinary (if an excess exists).
Preference shares generally have no maturity date. Therefore, no legal obligation exists to pay the
preference shareholder. As a result, companies classify preference shares as part of equity. Companies
generally report preference shares at par value as the first item in the equity section. They report any
excess over par value as part of share premium. They also consider dividends on preference shares as a
distribution of income and not an expense. Companies must disclose the pertinent rights of the
preference shares outstanding. [4]

Reacquisition of Shares
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
Companies often buy back their own shares. In fact, as indicated in Illustration 15.4, share buybacks
for companies in the FTSE 100 almost exceed share issuances in recent years and exceed dividends as a
form of distribution to shareholders. For example, oil company BP (GBR) purchased $90 million
worth of shares in 2018, and rival Royal Dutch Shell (NLD/GBR) announced a $25 billion share
buyback scheme that would run until 2020.
ILLUSTRATION 15.4 Share Issuances/Buybacks 2004–2018
Companies purchase their outstanding shares for several reasons:
1. To provide tax-efficient distributions of excess cash to shareholders. Tax rates on sales
of shares to the company by the shareholders are often much lower than the ordinary tax rate for
many investors.
2. To increase earnings per share and return on equity. Reducing both shares outstanding
and equity often enhances certain performance ratios. For example, Siemens (DEU) announced
its €4 billion buyback as part of its efforts to improve profitability. However, strategies to hype
performance measures might increase performance in the short run, but these tactics add no real
long-term value.
3. To provide shares for employee compensation contracts or to meet potential merger
needs. Honeywell Inc. (USA) reported that it would use part of its purchase of one million
ordinary shares for employee share option contracts. Other companies acquire shares to have
them available for business acquisitions.
4. To thwart takeover attempts or to reduce the number of shareholders. By reducing the
number of shares held by the public, existing owners and managements bar “outsiders” from
gaining control or significant influence.
5. To make a market in the shares. As one company executive noted, “Our company is trying to
establish a floor for its shares.” Purchasing shares in the marketplace creates a demand. This may
stabilize the share price or, in fact, increase it. For example, HTC (TWN) indicated its recent
treasury share transaction was one of the options for boosting its sagging share price.

Some publicly held corporations have chosen to “go private,” that is, to eliminate public (outside)
ownership entirely by purchasing all of their outstanding shares. Companies often accomplish such a
procedure through a leveraged buyout (LBO), in which the company borrows money to finance the
share repurchases.
After reacquiring shares, a company may either retire them or hold them in the treasury for reissue. If
not retired, such shares are referred to as treasury shares. Technically, treasury shares are a
corporation’s own shares, reacquired after having been issued and fully paid.
Treasury shares are not an asset. When a company purchases treasury shares, a reduction occurs
in both assets and equity. It is inappropriate to imply that a corporation can own a part of itself. A
corporation may sell treasury shares to obtain funds, but that does not make treasury shares a
statement of financial position asset (see Underlying Concepts). When a corporation buys back
some of its own outstanding shares, it has not acquired an asset; the buyback reduces net assets.
Underlying Concepts
As we indicated in Chapter 2, an asset should have probable future economic benefits. Treasury
shares simply reduce ordinary shares outstanding.
The possession of treasury shares does not give the corporation the right to vote, to exercise
preemptive rights as a shareholder, to receive cash dividends, or to receive assets upon corporate
liquidation. Treasury shares are essentially the same as unissued ordinary shares. No one
advocates classifying unissued ordinary shares as an asset in the statement of financial position.3
Purchase of Treasury Shares
Companies use two general methods of handling treasury shares in the accounts: the cost method and
the par value method. Both methods are generally acceptable.
The cost method results in debiting the Treasury Shares account for the reacquisition cost and in
reporting this account as a deduction from equity on the statement of financial position.
The par (stated) value method records all transactions in treasury shares at their par value and
reports the treasury shares as a deduction from share capital only.
No matter which method a company uses, most jurisdictions consider the cost of the treasury shares
acquired as a restriction on retained earnings.
Because just about all companies use the cost method to account for treasury shares, we illustrate its
use here. This method derives its name from the fact that a company maintains the Treasury Shares
account at the cost of the shares purchased.4 Under the cost method, the company debits the Treasury
Shares account for the cost of the shares acquired. Upon reissuance of the shares, it credits the account
for this same cost. The price received for the shares when issued originally does not affect the entries
to record the acquisition and reissuance of the treasury shares.
To illustrate, assume that Pacific Company issued 100,000 shares of $1 par value ordinary shares at a
price of $10 per share. In addition, it has retained earnings of $300,000. Illustration 15.5 shows the
equity section on December 31, 2021, before purchase of treasury shares.

Equity
Share capital—ordinary, $1 par, 100,000 shares issued and outstanding
Share premium—ordinary
Retained earnings
Total equity
ILLUSTRATION 15.5 Equity with No Treasury Shares
On January 20, 2022, Pacific acquires 10,000 of its shares at $11 per share. Pacific records the
reacquisition as follows.
January 20, 2022
Treasury Shares 110,000
Cash
Note that Pacific debits Treasury Shares for the cost of the shares purchased. The original account,
Share Capital—Ordinary, is not affected because the number of issued shares does not change. The
same is true for the Share Premium—Ordinary account. Pacific then deducts treasury shares to
determine total equity.
Illustration 15.6 shows the equity section for Pacific after purchase of the treasury shares.
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, $1 par value, 100,000 shares issued and 90,000 outstanding $ 100,000
Share premium—ordinary
Retained earnings
Less: Cost of treasury shares (10,000 shares)
Total equity
ILLUSTRATION 15.6 Equity with Treasury Shares
Pacific subtracts the cost of the treasury shares from the total of share capital—ordinary, share
premium—ordinary, and retained earnings. It therefore reduces equity. Many jurisdictions require a
corporation to restrict retained earnings for the cost of treasury shares purchased. The restriction
keeps intact the corporation’s capital. When the corporation sells the treasury shares, it lifts the
restriction.
Pacific discloses both the number of shares issued (100,000) and the number of shares in the treasury
(10,000). The difference is the number of shares outstanding (90,000). The term outstanding
shares means the number of issued shares that shareholders own.
Sale of Treasury Shares
Companies usually reissue or retire treasury shares. When selling treasury shares, the accounting for
the sale depends on the price. If the selling price of the treasury shares equals its cost, the company
records the sale of the shares by debiting Cash and crediting Treasury Shares. In cases where the
selling price of the treasury shares is not equal to cost, then accounting for treasury shares sold above
cost differs from the accounting for treasury shares sold below cost. However, the sale of treasury
shares either above or below cost increases both total assets and equity.
Sale of Treasury Shares Above Cost
When the selling price of the treasury shares exceeds its cost, a company credits the difference to Share
Premium—Treasury. To illustrate, assume that Pacific acquired 10,000 treasury shares at $11 per
share. It now sells 1,000 shares at $15 per share on March 10. Pacific records the entry as follows.

March 10, 2022
March 10, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $15)
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
Share Premium—Treasury
There are two reasons why Pacific does not credit $4,000 to Gain on Sale of Treasury Shares: (1) gains
on sales occur when selling assets; treasury shares are not an asset, and (2) a gain or loss should not
be recognized from share transactions with its own shareholders. Thus, Pacific should not include
share premium arising from the sale of treasury shares in the measurement of net income. Instead, it
lists share premium from treasury shares separately on the statement of financial position.
Sale of Treasury Shares Below Cost
When a corporation sells treasury shares below its cost, it usually debits the excess of the cost over
selling price to Share Premium—Treasury. Thus, if Pacific sells an additional 1,000 treasury shares on
March 21 at $8 per share, it records the sale as follows.
March 21, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $8)
Share Premium—Treasury
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
We can make several observations based on the two sale entries (sale above cost and sale below cost):
(1) Pacific credits Treasury Shares at cost in each entry; (2) Pacific uses Share Premium—Treasury for
the difference between the cost and the resale price of the shares, and (3) neither entry affects Share
Capital—Ordinary.
After eliminating the credit balance in Share Premium—Treasury, the corporation debits any additional
excess of cost over selling price to Retained Earnings. To illustrate, assume that Pacific sells an
additional 1,000 shares at $8 per share on April 10. Illustration 15.7 shows the balance in the Share
Premium—Treasury account (before the April 10 purchase).
Share Premium—Treasury
Mar. 21 3,000 Mar. 10 4,000
Balance 1,000
ILLUSTRATION 15.7 Treasury Share Transactions in Share Premium—Treasury
Account
In this case, Pacific debits $1,000 of the excess to Share Premium—Treasury. It debits the remainder to
Retained Earnings. The entry is as follows.
April 10, 2022
Cash (1,000 × $8)
Share Premium—Treasury
Retained Earnings
Treasury Shares (1,000 × $11)
Retiring Treasury Shares
The board of directors may approve the retirement of treasury shares. This decision results in
cancellation of the treasury shares and a reduction in the number of issued shares. Retired treasury
shares have the status of authorized and unissued shares. The accounting effects are similar to the sale
of treasury shares except that corporations debit applicable equity accounts related to the

retired shares instead of cash. For example, if a corporation originally sells the shares at par, it debits
Share Capital—Ordinary for the par value per share. If it originally sells the shares at $3 above par
value, it also debits Share Premium—Ordinary for $3 per share at retirement.
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Signals to Buy?
As indicated in Illustration 15.4, companies have steadily increased repurchases of their own
shares in recent years. And why not? Few company announcements are more beloved by investors
than those that indicate a share buyback is on the horizon. Following a lull in buybacks during the
financial crisis of 2008, companies have increased their buyback programs. For example,
buybacks by the companies in the FTSE 100 increased steadily before and after the financial
crisis, with major companies such as BP (GBR), Royal Dutch Shell (NLD/GBR), and Burberry
(GBR), as well as insurers Allianz (CHE) and Zurich (CHE), making some of the bigger
repurchases.
Increases in buybacks are music to investors’ ears because it indicates that executives at some of
the companies have confidence that better times are ahead. The buybacks also show that cash
reserves are healthy enough for companies to believe they not only have enough cash to cover
their day-to-day functions but also enough to spare to allow for generous buybacks. In fact,
market experts often look to share buybacks as a buy signal. That strategy is not surprising if you
look at the performance of the companies that did buybacks. For example, in one study, buyback
companies outperformed similar companies without buybacks by an average of 23 percent. In a
recent three-year period, companies followed by BuybackLetter.com (USA) were up 16.4
percent, while the broader market index was up just 7.1 percent. Why the premium? The
conventional wisdom is that companies that buy back shares believe their shares are undervalued.
Thus, analysts view the buyback announcement as an important piece of inside information about
future company prospects.
Sources: Data from G. Howes, “FTSE 100 Share Buy-Backs on the Increase: Is This a Good Sign?” Director of Finance Online
(February 5, 2013); T. Delaney and J. Sohn, “More Buybacks,” Naples Daily News (June 28, 2015); and C. Cornish, “UK Share
Buybacks Accelerate as Market Lags Behind,” Financial Times (March 16, 2018).
Dividend Policy
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
Determining the proper amount of dividends to pay is a difficult financial management decision.
Companies that are paying dividends are extremely reluctant to reduce or eliminate their dividend.
They fear that the securities market might view this action negatively. As a consequence, companies
that have been paying cash dividends will make every effort to continue to do so. In addition, the type
of shareholder the company has (taxable or non-taxable, retail investor or institutional investor) plays
a large role in determining dividend policy.5
Very few companies pay dividends in amounts equal to their legally available retained
earnings. The major reasons are as follows.
1. To maintain agreements (bond covenants) with specific creditors to retain all or a portion of the
earnings in the form of assets, or to build up additional protection against possible loss.
2. To meet corporation requirements that earnings equivalent to the cost of treasury shares
purchased be restricted against dividend declarations.

3. To retain assets that would otherwise be paid out as dividends, in order to finance growth or
expansion. This is sometimes called internal financing, reinvesting earnings, or “plowing” the
profits back into the business.
4. To smooth out dividend payments from year to year by accumulating earnings in good years, and
using such accumulated earnings as a basis for dividends in bad years.
5. To build up a cushion or buffer against possible losses or errors in the calculation of profits.
The reasons above are self-explanatory except for the second. The laws of some jurisdictions require
that the corporation restrict its contributed capital from distribution to shareholders, to protect against
loss for creditors.6 The applicable law determines the legality of a dividend.
Financial Condition and Dividend Distributions
Effective management of a company requires attention to more than the legality of dividend
distributions. Management must also consider economic conditions, and most importantly, liquidity.
Assume an extreme situation as shown in Illustration 15.8.
Statement of Financial Position
Plant assets €500,000 Share capital
€500,000 Retained earnings
ILLUSTRATION 15.8 Statement of Financial Position, Showing a Lack of Liquidity
The depicted company has a retained earnings credit balance. Unless restricted, it can declare a
dividend of €100,000. But because all its assets are plant assets used in operations, payment of a cash
dividend of €100,000 would require the sale of plant assets or borrowing.
Even if a statement of financial position shows current assets, as in Illustration 15.9, the question
remains as to whether the company needs those cash assets for other purposes.
Statement of Financial Position
Plant assets €460,000 Share capital
Cash
100,000 Retained earnings
€560,000 Current liabilities
ILLUSTRATION 15.9 Statement of Financial Position, Showing Cash but Minimal
Working Capital
The existence of current liabilities strongly implies that the company needs some of the cash to meet
current debts as they mature. In addition, day-to-day cash requirements for payrolls and other
expenditures not included in current liabilities also require cash.
Thus, before declaring a dividend, management must consider availability of funds to pay the
dividend. A company should not pay a dividend unless both the present and future financial position
warrant the distribution.
Types of Dividends
Companies generally base dividend distributions either on accumulated profits (that is, retained
earnings) or on some other equity item such as share premium. Dividends are of the following types.
1. Cash dividends.
2. Property dividends.

3. Liquidating dividends.
4. Share dividends.
Although commonly paid in cash, companies occasionally pay dividends in shares or some other asset.
All dividends, except for share dividends, reduce the total equity in the corporation. When
declaring a share dividend, the corporation does not pay out assets or incur a liability. It issues
additional shares to each shareholder and nothing more.
The natural expectation of any shareholder who receives a dividend is that the corporation has
operated successfully. As a result, he or she is receiving a share of its profits. A company should
disclose a liquidating dividend—that is, a dividend not based on retained earnings—to the
shareholders so that they will not misunderstand its source.
Cash Dividends
The board of directors votes on the declaration of cash dividends. Upon approval of the resolution,
the board declares a dividend. Before paying it, however, the company must prepare a current list of
shareholders. For this reason, there is usually a time lag between declaration and payment. For
example, the board of directors might approve a resolution at the January 10 (date of declaration)
meeting and declare it payable February 5 (date of payment) to all shareholders of record January 25
(date of record).7 In this example, the period from January 10 to January 25 gives time for the
company to complete and register any transfers in process. The time from January 25 to February 5
provides an opportunity for the transfer agent or accounting department, depending on who does this
work, to prepare a list of shareholders as of January 25 and to prepare and mail dividend checks.
A declared cash dividend is a liability. Because payment is generally required very soon, it
is usually a current liability. Companies use the following entries to record the declaration and
payment of an ordinary dividend payable in cash. For example, Roadway Freight Corp. on June 10
declared a cash dividend of 50 cents a share on 1.8 million shares payable July 16 to all shareholders of
record June 24. The entries for this dividend are shown in Illustration 15.10.
ILLUSTRATION 15.10 Cash Dividend Entries
To set up a ledger account that shows the amount of dividends declared during the year, Roadway
Freight might debit Cash Dividends Declared instead of Retained Earnings at the time of declaration. It
then closes this account to Retained Earnings at year-end.
A company may declare dividends either as a certain percentage of par, such as a 6 percent dividend on
preference shares, or as an amount per share, such as 60 cents per share on no-par ordinary shares. In
the first case, the rate multiplied by the par value of outstanding shares equals the total dividend. In
the second, the dividend equals the amount per share multiplied by the number of shares outstanding.
Companies do not declare or pay cash dividends on treasury shares because they are not
outstanding.

Dividend policies vary among corporations. Some companies take pride in a long, unbroken string of
quarterly dividend payments. They would lower or pass the dividend only if forced to do so by a
sustained decline in earnings or a critical shortage of cash.
“Growth” companies, on the other hand, pay little or no cash dividends because their policy is to
expand as rapidly as internal and external financing permit. For example, Ophir Energy plc (GBR)
does not pay cash dividends to its ordinary shareholders so that the cash can be used in exploration and
production. Investors in these growth companies hope that the price of their shares will appreciate in
value. The investors will then realize a profit when they sell their shares. Many companies focus more
on increasing share price, share repurchase programs, and corporate earnings than on dividend payout.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Dividends Up, Dividends Down
An investment strategy focusing on shares with the potential of increasing dividends has been a
mainstay for many investors. Said one market watcher, “Investors too often overlook the
importance of dividends, particularly the contribution to total return from reinvested dividends.…
Dividends also can provide a good hedge against inflation in the form of a growing stream of
income.” One study, the results of which are summarized in the following table, indicates the
importance of dividends for investment returns.
Average Annual Returns and 
Volatility by Dividend Policy
Returns
Dividend growers and initiators
Dividend payers
No change in dividend policy
Dividend non-payers
Dividend cutters and eliminators
−0.31
Equal-weighted S&P 500 Index
Sources: Ned Davis Research (December 2012); stocks within the S&P 500 Index.
Companies that raised their dividends are classified as dividend growers and initiators, as opposed
to other companies that are classified as dividend cutters and eliminators. The study also
identified companies with no change in dividend policy. The table supports the advice to keep an
eye on dividend growth. What the table tells us is that companies that grew or initiated a dividend
have experienced the highest returns relative to other shares. That is, over a multiyear investment
horizon, an investment of $100 would have grown to $4,169, while dividend non-payers only
increased to $193. In addition, the higher performers offered lower volatility of returns in all
market environments.
More recent data on the dividends and investments returns continue to tell the same story. From
1958 through 2018, a portfolio with the top 20 percent of S&P 500 companies ranked by dividend
yield and weighted by market capitalization outperformed the overall S&P 500 by 2.13 percentage
points annually, according to Greenrock Research (USA).
Indeed, central banks’ low interest rate monetary policies are adding to the current continuing
appeal of dividend securities. That’s because lower interest rates push bond yields lower, making
shares more attractive to investors. While most investors buy dividend shares for the steady
income stream, that is not the only benefit these investments offer, financial experts say. Indeed,
research shows that dividend shares often outperform their non-dividend-paying counterparts
over longer periods. That is partly because dividend payments account for a substantial portion of
the securities market’s total return. Researcher Morningstar Inc. (USA) calculates that
dividends were responsible for 19 percent of the S&P 500 index’s return over the past five years.
Other research indicates much higher portions for longer periods, thanks to the compounding of
reinvested dividends.
Thus, companies that grow dividends are signaling confidence about future earnings and are most
likely to perform well throughout market cycles—this makes them good candidates for long-term
growth.
Sources: Data from R. Evans, “Here Are the American and European Companies with Incredible Track Records of Raising
Their Dividends,” The Telegraph (November 4, 2013); Hartford Funds, “The Power of Dividends: Past, Present, and Future,”
Second Quarter 2014 White Paper (2014); and D. Weil, “Why Dividend Stocks Are Popular Again,” Wall Street Journal (March

Property Dividends
Dividends payable in assets of the corporation other than cash are called property dividends or
dividends in kind. Property dividends may be merchandise, real estate, or investments, or whatever
form the board of directors designates. Gold Bullion Development Corporation (CAN) has a long-
standing practice of paying dividends in gold instead of cash. Because of the obvious difficulties of
divisibility of units and delivery to shareholders, the usual property dividend is in the form of securities
of other companies that the distributing corporation holds as an investment.
When declaring a property dividend, the corporation should remeasure at fair value the property
it will distribute, recognizing any gain or loss as the difference between the property’s fair value
and carrying value at date of declaration. The corporation may then record the declared dividend as a
debit to Retained Earnings (or Property Dividends Declared) and a credit to Property Dividends
Payable, at an amount equal to the fair value of the distributed property. Upon distribution of the
dividend, the corporation debits Property Dividends Payable and credits the account containing the
distributed asset (restated at fair value). Illustration 15.11 presents a property dividend situation.
Entries for Property Dividends
Facts: Tsen Ltd. transferred to shareholders some of its investments in securities with a carrying
value of HK$1,250,000 by declaring a property dividend on December 28, 2021, to be distributed on
January 30, 2022, to shareholders of record on January 15, 2022.
Question: If, at the date of declaration, the securities have a fair value of HK$2,000,000,
what entries does Tsen make at the dates of declaration and distribution?
Solution: Tsen makes the following entries.
At date of declaration (December 28, 2021)
Equity Investments
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
Retained Earnings (Property Dividends Declared) 2,000,000
Property Dividends Payable
 
At date of distribution (January 30, 2022)
Property Dividends Payable
Equity Investments
ILLUSTRATION 15.11 Property Dividend Entries
Liquidating Dividends
Some corporations use amounts paid in by shareholders as a basis for dividends. Without proper
disclosure of this fact, shareholders may erroneously believe the corporation has been operating at a
profit. To avoid this type of deception, intentional or unintentional, a clear statement of the source of
every dividend should accompany the dividend check.
Dividends based on other than retained earnings are sometimes described as liquidating dividends.
This term implies that such dividends are a return of the shareholder’s investment rather than of
profits. In other words, any dividend not based on earnings reduces amounts paid in by

shareholders, and to that extent, it is a liquidating dividend. Companies in the extractive
industries may pay dividends equal to the total of accumulated income and depletion. The portion of
these dividends in excess of accumulated income represents a return of part of the shareholder’s
investment. Illustration 15.12 presents a liquidating dividend example.
Entries for Liquidating Dividends
Facts: McChesney Mines issued a “dividend” to its ordinary shareholders of £1,200,000. The cash
dividend announcement noted that shareholders should consider £900,000 as income and the
remainder a return of capital.
Question: What are the entries for McChesney at declaration date and at the date of
distribution?
Solution: McChesney Mines records the dividend as follows.
At date of declaration
Retained Earnings
Share Premium—Ordinary
Dividends Payable
 
At date of payment
Dividends Payable
Cash
ILLUSTRATION 15.12 Liquidating Dividend Entries
In some cases, management simply decides to cease business and declares a liquidating dividend. In
these cases, liquidation may take place over a number of years to ensure an orderly and fair sale of
assets. For example, when Overseas National Airways (USA) dissolved, it agreed to pay a
liquidating dividend to its shareholders over a period of years equivalent to $8.60 per share. Each
liquidating dividend payment in such cases reduces the amount paid in by shareholders.
Share Dividends and Share Splits
Share Dividends
Companies sometimes issue a share dividend. In this case, the company distributes no assets.
Each shareholder maintains exactly the same proportionate interest in the corporation and the same
total book value after the company issues the share dividend. Of course, the book value per share is
lower because each shareholder holds more shares.
A share dividend therefore is the issuance by a corporation of its own shares to its shareholders on a
pro rata basis, without receiving any consideration. In recording a share dividend, some believe that the
company should transfer the par value of the shares issued as a dividend from retained earnings to
share capital.8
To illustrate a share dividend, assume that Vine plc has outstanding 100,000 shares of £1 par value
ordinary shares and retained earnings of £50,000. If Vine declares a 10 percent share dividend, it
issues 10,000 additional shares to current shareholders. The fair value of the shares at the time of the
share dividend is £8. Given this information, the entry is:
At date of declaration

At date of declaration
Retained Earnings (Share Dividend Declared) 10,000
Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable
Two important points should be noted about this entry. First, the par value, not the fair value, is used
to record the share dividend. Second, the share dividend does not affect any asset or liability. The entry
merely reflects a reclassification of equity. If Vine prepares a statement of financial position between
the dates of declaration and distribution, it should show the ordinary share dividend distributable in
the equity section as an addition to share capital—ordinary (whereas it shows cash or property
dividends payable as current liabilities).
When issuing the shares, the entry is:
At date of distribution
Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable 10,000
Share Capital—Ordinary
No matter what the fair value is at the time of the share dividend, each shareholder retains the same
proportionate interest in the corporation.
Some applicable laws and exchange rules specifically prohibit the issuance of share dividends on
treasury shares. In those jurisdictions that permit treasury shares to participate in the distribution
accompanying a share dividend or share split, the planned use of the treasury shares influences
corporate practice. For example, if a corporation issues treasury shares in connection with employee
share options, the treasury shares may participate in the distribution because the corporation usually
adjusts the number of shares under option for any share dividends or splits. But no useful purpose is
served by issuing additional shares to the treasury shares without a specific purpose, since they are
essentially equivalent to authorized but unissued shares.
To continue with our example of the effect of the share dividend, note in Illustration 15.13 that the
share dividend does not change the total equity. Also note that it does not change the proportion of the
total shares outstanding held by each shareholder.

Before dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 100,000 shares of £1 par
Retained earnings
Total equity
Shareholders’ interests:
A. 40,000 shares, 40% interest, book value
B. 50,000 shares, 50% interest, book value
C. 10,000 shares, 10% interest, book value
After declaration but before distribution of 10% share dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 100,000 shares at £1 par
Ordinary share dividend distributable, 10,000 shares at £1 par
Retained earnings (£50,000 – £10,000)
Total equity
After declaration and distribution of 10% share dividend
Share capital—ordinary, 110,000 shares at £1 par
Retained earnings (£50,000 – £10,000)
Total equity
Shareholders’ interest:
A. 44,000 shares, 40% interest, book value
B. 55,000 shares, 50% interest, book value
C. 11,000 shares, 10% interest, book value
ILLUSTRATION 15.13 Effects of Share Dividends
Share Splits
If a company has undistributed earnings over several years and accumulates a sizable balance in
retained earnings, the market value of its outstanding shares likely increases. Shares issued at prices
less than £50 a share can easily attain a market price in excess of £200 a share. The higher the market
price of a share, however, the less readily some investors can purchase it.
The managements of many corporations believe that better public relations depend on wider
ownership of the company shares. They therefore target a market price sufficiently low to be within
range of the majority of potential investors. To reduce the market price of each share, they use the
common device of a share split. For example, after its share price increased significantly, Arcam AB
(SWE) announced a split of its shares 4-for-1. The split should reduce the share price, leading to wider
distribution of shares at lower trading prices.
From an accounting standpoint, Arcam records no entry for a share split. However, it enters a
memorandum note to indicate the changed par value of the shares and the increased number of shares.
Illustration 15.14 shows the lack of change in equity for a 2-for-1 share split on 100,000 shares of €1
par value, with the par being halved upon issuance of the additional shares.

Equity Before 2-for-1 Split
Equity After 2-for-1 Split
Share capital—ordinary,
Share capital—ordinary,
100,000 shares at €1 par €100,000
200,000 shares at €.50 par €100,000
Retained earnings
50,000 Retained earnings
ILLUSTRATION 15.14 Effects of a Share Split
Share Split and Share Dividend Differentiated
From a legal standpoint, a share split differs from a share dividend. How? A share split increases the
number of shares outstanding and decreases the par or stated value per share. A share dividend,
although it increases the number of shares outstanding, does not decrease the par value;
thus, it increases the total par value of outstanding shares.
The reasons for issuing a share dividend are numerous and varied. Share dividends can be primarily a
publicity gesture because some consider share dividends as dividends. Another reason is that
the company may simply wish to retain profits in the business by capitalizing a part of retained
earnings. In such a situation, it makes a transfer on declaration of a share dividend from earned capital
to contributed capital.
A company may also use a share dividend, like a share split, to increase the marketability of the shares,
although marketability is often a secondary consideration. That is, a share dividend has the same effect
on market price as a share split. However, as discussed earlier, a share dividend does not alter the par
value per share.
Illustration 15.15 summarizes and compares the effects in the statement of financial position and
related items of various types of dividends and share splits.
Effect on:
Declaration and
Distribution of
Declaration of Cash
Dividend
Payment of Cash
Dividend
Share
Dividend
Share
Split
Retained earnings
Decrease
–0–
Decreasea
–0–
Share capital
–0–
–0–
Increasea
–0–
Share premium
–0–
–0–
–0–
–0–
Total equity
Decrease
–0–
–0–
–0–
Working capital
Decrease
–0–
–0–
–0–
Total assets
–0–
Decrease
–0–
–0–
Number of shares
outstanding
–0–
–0–
Increase
Increase
aPar or stated value of shares.
ILLUSTRATION 15.15 Effects of Dividends and Share Splits on Financial Statement
Elements
Presentation and Analysis of Equity
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Indicate how to present and analyze equity.

Presentation of Equity
Statement of Financial Position
Illustration 15.16 shows a comprehensive equity section from the statement of financial position of
Frost SpA that includes the equity items we discussed in this chapter.9
Frost should disclose the pertinent rights and privileges of the various securities outstanding. For
example, companies must disclose all of the following: dividend and liquidation preferences,
participation rights, call prices and dates, conversion or exercise prices and pertinent dates, sinking
fund requirements, unusual voting rights, and significant terms of contracts to issue additional shares.
Liquidation preferences should be disclosed in the equity section of the statement of financial position,
rather than in the notes to the financial statements, to emphasize the possible effect of this restriction
on future cash flows.
Frost SpA
Equity
December 31, 2022
Share capital—preference, €100 par value, 7% cumulative, 100,000 shares
authorized, 30,000 shares issued and outstanding
Share capital—ordinary, no par, stated value €10 per share, 500,000 shares
authorized, 400,000 shares issued
Ordinary share dividend distributable
Share premium—preference
Share premium—ordinary
Retained earnings
Treasury shares (2,000 ordinary shares)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
Total equity
ILLUSTRATION 15.16 Comprehensive Equity Presentation
Disclosure of Restrictions on Retained Earnings
Many companies restrict retained earnings or dividends, without any formal journal entries. Such
restrictions are best disclosed by note. Parenthetical notations are sometimes used, but restrictions
imposed by bond indentures and loan agreements commonly require an extended explanation. Notes
provide a medium for more complete explanations and free the financial statements from abbreviated
notations. The note disclosure should reveal the source of the restriction, pertinent provisions, and the
amount of retained earnings subject to restriction or the amount not restricted.
Restrictions may be based on the retention of a certain retained earnings balance, the ability to
maintain certain working capital requirements, additional borrowing, and other considerations. The
example from the annual report of Samsung (KOR) in Illustration 15.17 shows a note disclosing
potential restrictions on retained earnings and dividends.

Samsung
21. RETAINED EARNINGS
Retained earnings as of December 31 consist of the following:
(in millions of Korean won)
Current Year
Prior Year
Appropriated
Legal reserve:
Earned surplus reserve1
₩ 450,789
₩ 450,789
Discretionary reserve:
Reserve for improvement of financial structure
Reserve for business rationalization
Reserve for overseas market development
Reserve for overseas investment losses
Reserve for research and human resource development
Reserve for export losses
Reserve for loss on disposal of treasury stock
Reserve for capital expenditure
Unappropriated
Total
₩55,419,551
₩51,065,174
1The Commercial Code of the Republic of Korea requires the Company to appropriate as a legal reserve, an amount equal to a minimum
of 10% of annual cash dividends declared, until the reserve equals 50% of its issued capital stock. The reserve is not available for the
payment of cash dividends, but may be transferred to capital stock through a resolution of the Board of Directors or used to reduce
accumulated deficit, if any, with the ratification of the shareholders.
ILLUSTRATION 15.17 Disclosure of Restrictions on Retained Earnings and Dividends
Presentation of Statement of Changes in Equity
Companies are also required to present a statement of changes in equity. The statement of changes
in equity includes the following.
1. Total comprehensive income for the period, showing separately the total amounts attributable to
owners of the parent and to non-controlling interests.
2. For each component of equity, the effects of retrospective application or retrospective restatement.
3. For each component of equity, a reconciliation between the carrying amount at the beginning and
the end of the period, separately disclosing changes resulting from:
a. Profit or loss.
b. Each item of other comprehensive income.
c. Transactions with owners in their capacity as owners, showing separately contributions by
and distributions to owners and changes in ownership interests in subsidiaries that do not
result in a loss of control.
A statement of changes in equity for BASF Group (DEU) is presented in Illustration 15.18.

In addition, BASF is required to present, either in the statement of changes in equity or in the notes,
the amount of dividends recognized as distributions to owners during the period and the related
amount per share. [5]
BASF Group
Statement of Equity
(in millions of euros)
Number of
shares
outstanding
Subscribed
capital
Capital
reserves
Retained
earnings
Other
comprehensive
income
Equity
attributable
to
shareholders
of BASF
Noncontrollin
interests
As of
December 31,
IFRS 9
transition
effect
—
—
—
(2
As of
January 1,
Effects of
acquisitions
achieved in
stages
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Dividend
paid
—
—
—
—
Income after
taxes
—
—
—
—
Changes to
income and
expense
recognized
directly in
equity
—
—
—
—
Changes in
scope of
consolidation
and other
changes
—
—
—
As of
December
ILLUSTRATION 15.18 Statement of Changes in Equity

Analysis
Analysts use equity ratios to evaluate a company’s profitability and long-term solvency. We discuss and
illustrate the following three ratios below.
1. Return on ordinary share equity.
2. Payout ratio.
3. Book value per share.
Return on Ordinary Share Equity
The return on ordinary share equity (or return on equity) measures profitability from the ordinary
shareholders’ viewpoint. This ratio shows how many dollars of net income the company earned for
each dollar invested by the owners. Return on equity (ROE) also helps investors judge the worthiness
of a share when the overall market is not doing well.
Return on equity equals net income less preference dividends, divided by average ordinary
shareholders’ equity. For example, assume that Gerber’s Inc. had net income of $360,000, that it
declared and paid preference dividends of $54,000, and average ordinary shareholders’ equity of
$2,550,000. Illustration 15.19 shows how to compute Gerber’s ratio.
Return on Ordinary Share Equity =
=
= 12%
ILLUSTRATION 15.19 Computation of Return on Ordinary Share Equity
As shown in Illustration 15.19, when preference shares are present, income available to ordinary
shareholders equals net income less preference dividends.
A company can improve its return on ordinary share equity through the prudent use of debt or
preference share financing. Trading on the equity describes the practice of using borrowed money
or issuing preference shares in hopes of obtaining a higher rate of return on the money used. Ordinary
shareholders win if return on the assets is higher than the cost of financing these assets. When this
happens, the return on ordinary share equity will exceed the return on total assets. In short, the
company is “trading on the equity at a gain.” In this situation, the money obtained from bondholders or
preference shareholders earns enough to pay the interest or preference dividends and leaves a profit
for the ordinary shareholders. On the other hand, if the cost of the financing is higher than the rate
earned on the assets, the company is trading on equity at a loss and shareholders lose.
Payout Ratio
Another ratio of interest to investors, the payout ratio, is the ratio of cash dividends to net income. If
preference shares are outstanding, this ratio equals cash dividends paid to ordinary shareholders,
divided by net income available to ordinary shareholders. For example, assume that Troy SA has cash
dividends of €100,000 and net income of €500,000, and no preference shares outstanding.
Illustration 15.20 shows the payout ratio computation.
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Average Ordinary Shareholders’ Equity
$360,000  − $54,000

Payout Ratio =
=
= 20%
ILLUSTRATION 15.20 Computation of Payout Ratio
Recently, the payout ratio has plummeted. In 2000, more than half of earnings were converted to
dividends. In 2018, just 43 percent of the earnings of global public companies was distributed via
dividends.10
Book Value per Share
Another basis for evaluating net worth is found in the book value or equity value per share. Book
value per share is the amount each share would receive if the company were liquidated on the basis
of amounts reported on the statement of financial position. However, the figure loses much of
its relevance if the valuations on the statement of financial position fail to approximate fair value of
the assets. Book value per share equals ordinary shareholders’ equity divided by outstanding ordinary
shares. Assume that Chen Ltd.’s ordinary shareholders’ equity is HK$1,000,000 and that it has
100,000 shares of ordinary shares outstanding. Illustration 15.21 shows its book value per share
computation.
Book Value per Share =
=
  =  HK$10 per share
ILLUSTRATION 15.21 Computation of Book Value per Share
Cash Dividends
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Ordinary Shareholders’ Equity
Outstanding Shares
HK$1,000,000

APPENDIX 15A
Dividend Preferences and Book Value per Share
Dividend Preferences
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Discuss the different types of preference share dividends and their effect on book value per share.
Illustrations 15A.1 to 15A.4 indicate the effects of various dividend preferences on dividend
distributions to ordinary and preference shareholders. Assume that in 2022, Mason Company is to
distribute €50,000 as cash dividends, its outstanding ordinary shares have a par value of €400,000,
and its 6 percent preference shares have a par value of €100,000. Mason would distribute dividends to
each class, employing the assumptions given, as follows.
1. If the preference shares are non-cumulative and non-participating:
Preference Ordinary
Total
6% of €100,000
The remainder to ordinary
Totals
ILLUSTRATION 15A.1 Dividend Distribution, Non-Cumulative and Non-Participating
Preference
2. If the preference shares are cumulative and non-participating, and Mason Company did not pay
dividends on the preference shares in the preceding two years:
Preference Ordinary
Total
Dividends in arrears, 6% of €100,000 for 2 years
Current year’s dividend, 6% of €100,000
The remainder to ordinary
Totals
ILLUSTRATION 15A.2 Dividend Distribution, Cumulative and Non-Participating
Preference Shares, with Dividends in Arrears
3. If the preference shares are non-cumulative and are fully participating:11

Preference Ordinary
Total
Current year’s dividend, 6%
Participating dividend of 4%
Totals
The participating dividend was determined as follows:
Current year’s dividend:
Preference, 6% of €100,000 = € 6,000
Ordinary, 6% of €400,000
= 24,000
Amount available for participation (€50,000 – €30,000)
Par value of shares that are to participate (€100,000 + €400,000) €500,000
Rate of participation (€20,000 ÷ €500,000)
4%
Participating dividend:
Preference, 4% of €100,000
Ordinary, 4% of €400,000
ILLUSTRATION 15A.3 Dividend Distribution, Non-Cumulative and Fully Participating
Preference Shares
4. If the preference shares are cumulative and are fully participating, and Mason Company did not
pay dividends on the preference shares in the preceding two years:
Preference Ordinary
Total
Dividends in arrears, 6% of €100,000 for 2 years
Current year’s dividend, 6%
Participating dividend, 1.6% (€8,000 ÷ €500,000)
Totals
ILLUSTRATION 15A.4 Dividend Distribution, Cumulative and Fully Participating
Preference Shares, with Dividends in Arrears

Book Value per Share
Book value per share in its simplest form is computed as net assets divided by outstanding shares at
the end of the year. The computation of book value per share becomes more complicated if a company
has preference shares in its capital structure. For example, if preference dividends are in arrears, if the
preference shares are participating, or if preference shares have a redemption or liquidating value
higher than its carrying amount, the company must allocate retained earnings between the preference
and ordinary shareholders in computing book value.
For example, the situation in Illustration 15A.5 assumes that no preference dividends are in arrears
and that the preference shares are not participating. Now assume that the same facts exist, except that
the 5 percent preference shares are cumulative, participating shares up to 8 percent, and that dividends
for three years before the current year are in arrears. Illustration 15A.6 shows how to compute the
book value of the ordinary shares, assuming that no action has yet been taken concerning dividends for
the current year.
Equity
Preference Ordinary
Preference shares, 5%
Ordinary shares
Share premium—ordinary
Retained earnings
Totals
Shares outstanding
Book value per share
ILLUSTRATION 15A.5 Computation of Book Value per Share—No Dividends in Arrears
Equity
Preference Ordinary
Preference shares, 5%
Ordinary shares
Share premium—ordinary
Retained earnings:
Dividends in arrears (3 years at 5% a year)
Current year requirement at 5%
Participating—additional 3%
Remainder to ordinary
        
Totals
Shares outstanding
Book value per share
ILLUSTRATION 15A.6 Computation of Book Value per Share—with Dividends in
Arrears, Participating
As indicated, retained earnings is allocated between preference and ordinary shareholders in
computing book value per share.
In connection with the book value computation, the analyst must know how to handle the following
items: the number of authorized and unissued shares, the number of treasury shares on hand, any
commitments with respect to the issuance of unissued shares or the reissuance of treasury shares, and
the relative rights and privileges of the various types of shares authorized. As an example, if the

liquidating value of the preference shares is higher than its carrying amount, the liquidating amount
should be used in the book value computation.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
book value per share
callable preference shares
cash dividends
contributed (paid-in) capital
convertible preference shares
cost method
cumulative preference shares
dividend in arrears
earned capital
equity
leveraged buyout (LBO)
liquidating dividends
lump-sum sales
no-par shares
ordinary shares
par (stated) value method
participating preference shares
payout ratio
preemptive right
preference shares
property dividends
redeemable preference shares
residual interest
retained earnings
return on ordinary share equity
share dividends
share premium
share split
stated value
statement of changes in equity
trading on the equity
treasury shares
Learning Objectives Review

1 Describe the corporate form and the issuance of shares.
Among the specific characteristics of the corporate form that affect accounting are the (1) influence of
corporate law, (2) use of the share system, and (3) development of a variety of ownership interests. In
the absence of restrictive provisions, each ordinary share carries the right to share proportionately in
(1) profits and losses, (2) management (the right to vote for directors), (3) corporate assets upon
liquidation, and (4) any new issues of shares of the same class (called the preemptive right).
Equity is classified into two categories: contributed capital and earned capital. Contributed capital
(paid-in capital) describes the total amount paid in as share capital. Put another way, it is the amount
that shareholders advance to the corporation for use in the business. Contributed capital includes
items such as the par value of all outstanding shares and premiums less any discounts on issuance.
Earned capital is the capital that develops if the business operates profitably; it consists of all
undistributed income that remains invested in the company.
Accounts are kept for the following different types of shares. Par value shares: (a) Share Capital—
Preference or Share Capital—Ordinary, (b) Share Premium—Preference and Share Premium—Ordinary.
No-par shares: Share Capital—Ordinary or Share Capital—Ordinary and Share Premium—Ordinary if
stated value used. For shares issued in combination with other securities (lump-sum sales), the two
methods of allocation available are (a) the proportional method and (b) the incremental method. When
issuing shares for services or property other than cash, the company should record the exchange at the
fair value of the property or services received unless that fair value cannot be reliably measured.
Otherwise, use the fair value of the shares issued.
Preference shares are a special class of shares that possess certain preferences or features not
possessed by the ordinary shares. The features that are most often associated with preference share
issues are (1) preference as to dividends, (2) preference as to assets in the event of liquidation, (3)
convertible into ordinary shares, (4) callable at the option of the corporation, and (5) non-voting. At
issuance, the accounting for preference shares is similar to that for ordinary shares. When convertible
preference shares are converted, a company uses the book value method. It debits Share Capital—
Preference, along with any related Share Premium—Preference, and credits Share Capital—Ordinary
and Share Premium—Ordinary (if an excess exists).
2 Explain the accounting and reporting for treasury shares.
The cost method is generally used in accounting for treasury shares. This method derives its name
from the fact that a company maintains the Treasury Shares account at the cost of the shares
purchased. Under the cost method, a company debits the Treasury Shares account for the cost of the
shares acquired and credits it for this same cost upon reissuance. The price received for the shares
when originally issued does not affect the entries to record the acquisition and reissuance of the
treasury shares.
3 Explain the accounting and reporting issues related to dividends.
The incorporation laws normally provide information concerning the legal restrictions related to the
payment of dividends. Corporations rarely pay dividends in an amount equal to the legal limit. This is
due, in part, to the fact that companies use assets represented by undistributed earnings to finance
future operations of the business. If a company is considering declaring a dividend, it must ask two
preliminary questions. (1) Is the condition of the corporation such that the dividend is legally
permissible? (2) Is the condition of the corporation such that a dividend is economically sound?
Dividends are of the following types: (1) cash dividends, (2) property dividends, (3) liquidating
dividends (dividends based on other than retained earnings), and (4) share dividends (the issuance by a
corporation of its own shares to its shareholders on a pro rata basis but without receiving
consideration).

When declaring a share dividend, a company debits Retained Earnings at the par value of the shares it
distributes. The entry includes a credit to Ordinary Share Dividend Distributable at par value times the
number of shares. A share dividend is a capitalization of retained earnings that reduces retained
earnings. The par value per share and total equity remain unchanged with a share dividend, and all
shareholders retain their same proportionate share of ownership. A share split (or reverse share split)
results in an increase or decrease in the number of shares outstanding, with a corresponding decrease
or increase in the par or stated value per share. No accounting entry is required for a share split.
4 Indicate how to present and analyze equity.
The equity section of a statement of financial position includes share capital, share premium, and
retained earnings. A company may also have additional items such as treasury shares, accumulated
other comprehensive income (loss), and non-controlling interest. Companies are required to present a
statement of changes in equity. Ratios that use equity amounts are return on ordinary share equity,
payout ratio, and book value per share.
*5 Discuss the different types of preference share dividends and their effect on book
value per share.
The dividend preferences of preference shares affect the dividends paid to shareholders. Preference
shares can be (1) cumulative or non-cumulative, and (2) fully participating, partially participating, or
non-participating. If preference dividends are in arrears, if the preference shares are participating, or if
preference shares have a redemption or liquidation value higher than its carrying amount, allocate
retained earnings between preference and ordinary shareholders in computing book value per share.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions, and a full
glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
D’Ouville Company was formed on July 1, 2021. It was authorized to issue 500,000 shares of €10 par
value ordinary shares and 100,000 shares of 4%, €25 par value, cumulative and non-participating
preference shares. D’Ouville Company has a July 1–June 30 fiscal year. The following information
relates to the equity accounts of D’Ouville Company.
Ordinary Shares
Prior to the 2023–2024 fiscal year, D’Ouville Company had 110,000 shares of outstanding ordinary
shares issued as follows.
1. 95,000 shares were issued for cash on July 1, 2021, at €31 per share.
2. On July 24, 2021, 5,000 shares were exchanged for a plot of land which cost the seller €70,000
in 2015 and had an estimated fair value of €220,000 on July 24, 2021.
3. 10,000 shares were issued on March 1, 2023, for €42 per share.
During the 2023–2024 fiscal year, the following transactions regarding ordinary shares took place.
Nov.
D’Ouville purchased 2,000 of its own shares on the open market at €39 per share. D’Ouville
uses the cost method for treasury shares.
Dec. D’Ouville declared a 5% share dividend for shareholders of record on January 15, 2024, to be

issued on January 31, 2024. D’Ouville was having a liquidity problem and could not afford a
cash dividend at the time. D’Ouville’s ordinary shares were selling at €52 per share on
December 15, 2023.
June
D’Ouville sold 500 of its own ordinary shares that it had purchased on November 30, 2023,
for €21,000.
Preference Shares
D’Ouville issued 100,000 preference shares at €44 per share on July 1, 2022.
Cash Dividends
D’Ouville generally declares cash dividends in December and June, with payment being made to
shareholders of record in the following month. The cash dividends which have been declared since
inception of the company through June 30, 2024, are shown below.
Declaration Date Ordinary Shares Preference Shares
12/15/22 €0.30 per share €0.50 per share
6/15/23 €0.30 per share €0.50 per share
12/15/23
—
€0.50 per share
No cash dividends were declared during June 2024 due to the company’s liquidity problems.
Retained Earnings
As of June 30, 2023, D’Ouville’s retained earnings account had a balance of €550,000. For the fiscal
year ending June 30, 2024, D’Ouville reported net income of €120,000.
Instructions
Prepare the equity section of the statement of financial position, including appropriate notes, for
D’Ouville Company as of June 30, 2024, as it should appear in its annual report to the shareholders.
Solution
D’Ouville Company
Partial Statement of Financial Position
June 30, 2024
Equity
4% Share capital—preference, €25 par value, cumulative and non-participating, 100,000
shares authorized, 100,000 shares issued and outstanding (Note A)
Share capital—ordinary, €10 par value, 500,000 shares authorized, 115,400 shares issued,
with 1,500 shares held in the treasury
Share premium—preference
Share premium—ordinary
2,485,000*
Share premium—treasury
Retained earnings
Less: Treasury shares, 1,500 shares at cost
Total equity
Note A: D’Ouville Company is in arrears on the preference shares in the amount of €100,000.
*Share premium—ordinary:
Issue of 95,000 shares × (€31 − €10)

D’Ouville Company
Partial Statement of Financial Position
June 30, 2024
Issue of 5,000 shares for plot of land (€220,000 − €50,000)
10,000 shares issued (3/1/20) [10,000 × (€42 − €10)]
**Retained Earnings:
+
+
−
−
−
−
=
=
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities, and many
more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendix to the
chapter.
Questions
1. In the absence of restrictive provisions, what are the basic rights of shareholders of a corporation?
2. Why is a preemptive right important?
3. Distinguish between ordinary and preference shares.
4. Why is the distinction between contributed capital (paid-in capital) and retained earnings
important?
5. Explain each of the following terms: authorized ordinary shares, unissued ordinary shares, issued
ordinary shares, outstanding ordinary shares, and treasury shares.
6. What is meant by par value, and what is its significance to shareholders?
7. Describe the accounting for the issuance for cash of no-par value ordinary shares at a price in excess
of the stated value of the ordinary shares.
8. Explain the difference between the proportional method and the incremental method of allocating
the proceeds of lump-sum sales of share capital.
9. What are the different bases for share valuation when assets other than cash are received for issued
shares?
10. Explain how underwriting costs and accounting and legal fees associated with the issuance of
shares should be recorded.
11. For what reasons might a company purchase its own shares?
12. Discuss the propriety of showing:
a. Treasury shares as an asset.
b. “Gain” or “loss” on sale of treasury shares as additions to or deductions from income.
c. Dividends received on treasury shares as income.
13. What features or rights may alter the character of preference shares?
14. Kim Inc. recently noted that its 4% preference shares and 4% participating preference shares are
both cumulative and have priority as to dividends up to 4% of their par value. Its participating
preference shares participate equally with the ordinary shares in any dividends in excess of 4%. What is
meant by the term participating? Cumulative?
Beginning balance
Income
Share dividend
Preference dividend
Ret. earnings, end

15. Where in the financial statements are preference shares normally reported?
16. List five elements included in equity.
17. BMG purchases 10,000 shares of its own previously issued €10 par ordinary shares for €290,000.
Assuming the shares are held in the treasury with intent to reissue, what effect does this transaction
have on (a) net income, (b) total assets, (c) retained earnings, and (d) total equity?
18. Indicate how each of the following accounts should be classified in the equity section.
a. Share Capital—Ordinary
b. Retained Earnings
c. Share Premium—Ordinary
d. Treasury Shares
e. Share Premium—Treasury
f. Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
g. Share Capital—Preference
19. What factors influence the dividend policy of a company?
20. What are the principal considerations of a board of directors in making decisions involving
dividend declarations? Discuss briefly.
21. Dividends are sometimes said to have been paid “out of retained earnings.” What is the error, if
any, in that statement?
22. Distinguish among cash dividends, property dividends, liquidating dividends, and share dividends.
23. Describe the accounting entry for a share dividend, if any. Describe the accounting entry for a
share split, if any.
24. Share splits and share dividends may be used by a corporation to change the number of its shares
outstanding.
a. From an accounting viewpoint, explain how the share split differs from an ordinary share
dividend.
b. How should a share dividend that has been declared but not yet issued be classified in a statement
of financial position? Why?
25. The following comment appeared in the notes of Mona Corporation’s annual report: “Such
distributions, representing proceeds from the sale of Sarazan, Inc., were paid in the form of partial
liquidating dividends and were in lieu of a portion of the Company’s ordinary cash dividends.” How
would a partially liquidating dividend be accounted for in the financial records?
26. This comment appeared in the annual report of Christensen Inc.: “The Company could pay cash or
property dividends on the Class A ordinary shares without paying cash or property dividends on the
Class B ordinary shares. But if the Company pays any cash or property dividends on the Class B
ordinary shares, it would be required to pay at least the same dividend on the Class A ordinary shares.”
How is a property dividend accounted for in the financial records?
27. For what reasons might a company restrict a portion of its retained earnings?
28. How are restrictions of retained earnings reported?
*29. Wang Corp. had $100,000 of 7%, $20 par value preference shares and 12,000 shares of $25 par
value ordinary shares outstanding throughout 2022.

a. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $64,000 and that the preference shares are
not cumulative but are fully participating, ordinary shareholders should receive 2022 dividends
totaling what amount?
b. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $64,000 and that the preference shares are
fully participating and cumulative with preference dividends in arrears for 2021, preference
shareholders should receive 2022 dividends totaling what amount?
c. Assuming that total dividends declared in 2022 were $30,000; that the preference shares are
cumulative, non-participating, and were issued on January 1, 2021; and that $5,000 of preference
dividends were declared and paid in 2021, the ordinary shareholders should receive 2022 dividends
totaling what amount?
Brief Exercises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the accounting procedures for equity under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
The accounting for transactions related to equity, such as issuance of shares, purchase of treasury
shares, and declaration and payment of dividends, is similar under both IFRS and U.S. GAAP. Major
differences relate to terminology used and presentation of equity information.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to equity.
Similarities
The accounting for the issuance of shares and purchase of treasury shares is similar under both
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
The accounting for declaration and payment of dividends and the accounting for share splits is
similar under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Differences
U.S. GAAP requires that small share dividends (referred to as stock dividends) be recorded by
transferring an amount equal to the fair value of the shares issued from retained earnings to share
capital accounts. IFRS is silent on the accounting for share dividends.

Major differences relate to terminology used, introduction of concepts such as revaluation surplus,
and presentation of equity information.
In the United States and the United Kingdom, many companies rely on substantial investments
from private investors. Other countries have different investor groups. For example, in Germany,
financial institutions such as banks are not only the major creditors but often are also the largest
shareholders as well.
The accounting for treasury share retirements differs between U.S. GAAP and IFRS. Under U.S.
GAAP, a company has three options: (1) charge the excess of the cost of treasury shares over par
value to retained earnings, (2) allocate the difference between paid-in capital and retained
earnings, or (3) charge the entire amount to paid-in capital. Under IFRS, the excess may have to be
charged to paid-in capital, depending on the original transaction related to the issuance of the
shares.
The statement of changes in equity is usually referred to as the statement of stockholders’ equity
(or shareholders’ equity) under U.S. GAAP.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS use the term retained earnings. However, U.S. GAAP uses the account
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (Loss). Use of this account is gaining prominence
within the IFRS literature, which traditionally has relied on the term “reserve” as a dumping
ground for other types of equity transactions, such as other comprehensive income items, as well
as various types of unusual transactions related to convertible debt and share option contracts.
The term surplus is generally not used in U.S. GAAP, as the standards do not allow revaluation
accounting. Under IFRS, it is common to report “revaluation surplus” related to increases or
decreases in items such as property, plant, and equipment; mineral resources; and some intangible
assets.
About the Numbers
As indicated, numerous differences in terminology exist in comparing equity under U.S. GAAP and
IFRS. The following excerpt from a U.S. statement of financial position (balance sheet) illustrates these
distinctions (you might compare the presentation here to that in Illustration 15.16 under IFRS).
Frost Company
Stockholders’ Equity
December 31, 2022
Capital stock
Preferred stock, $100 par value, 7% cumulative, 100,000 shares authorized,
30,000 shares issued and outstanding
Common stock, no par, stated value $10 per share, 500,000 shares
authorized, 400,000 shares issued
Common stock dividend distributable, 20,000 shares
Total capital stock
Additional paid-in capital
Excess over par—preferred
Excess over stated value—common
Total paid-in capital
Retained earnings
Total paid-in capital and retained earnings
Less: cost of treasury stock (2,000 shares, common)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss

Frost Company
Stockholders’ Equity
December 31, 2022
Total stockholders’ equity
On the Horizon
As indicated earlier in the text, the IASB and the FASB have completed some work on a project related
to financial statement presentation. An important part of this study is to determine whether certain
line items, subtotals, and totals should be clearly defined, and whether they should be included in the
financial statements. For example, it is likely that the statement of changes in equity and its
presentation will be examined closely. In addition, the options of how to present other comprehensive
income under U.S. GAAP will change in any converged standard.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following does not represent a pair of U.S. GAAP/IFRS–comparable terms?
a. Treasury stock/Repurchase reserve.
b. Additional paid-in capital/Share premium.
c. Common stock/Share capital—ordinary.
d. Preferred stock/Preference share.
2. Under U.S. GAAP, the amount of capital received in excess of par value would be credited to:
a. Retained Earnings.
b. Contributed Capital.
c. Share Premium.
d. Par value is not used under U.S. GAAP.
3. The term “reserves” is used under U.S. GAAP with reference to all of the following except.
a. gains and losses on revaluation of property, plant, and equipment.
b. capital received in excess of the par value of issued shares.
c. retained earnings.
d. U.S. GAAP does not use the term reserves.
4. Which of the following is false?
a. Under U.S. GAAP, companies cannot record gains on transactions involving their own shares.
b. Under U.S. GAAP, companies do not make an entry for a share split.
c. Under U.S. GAAP, the statement of stockholders’ equity is a required statement.
d. Under U.S. GAAP, a company records a revaluation surplus when it experiences an increase in the
price of its common stock.
5. Under U.S. GAAP, a purchase by a company of its own shares results in.
a. an increase in treasury shares.
b. a decrease in assets.

c. a decrease in equity.
d. All of the answer choices are correct.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP15.1 Mary Tokar is comparing a U.S. GAAP-based company to a company that uses IFRS. Both
companies report investments, with unrealized gains and losses not reported in income. The IFRS
company reports unrealized losses on these investments under the heading “Reserves” in its equity
section. However, Mary cannot find a similar heading in the U.S. GAAP company financial statements.
Can Mary conclude that the U.S. GAAP company has no unrealized gains or losses on its investments?
Explain.
GAAP15.2 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with
respect to the accounting for equity.
GAAP15.3 Briefly discuss the implications of the financial statement presentation project for the
reporting of equity.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. a 2. b 3. d 4. d 5. d
Notes
1 This privilege is referred to as a share right or warrant. The warrants issued in these situations are
of short duration, unlike the warrants issued with other securities.
2 Companies rarely, if ever, issue shares at a value below par value. The reason: The corporation may
call on the original purchaser or the current holder of the shares issued below par to pay in the
amount of the discount to prevent creditors from sustaining a loss upon liquidation of the
corporation.
3 The possible justification for classifying these shares as assets is that the company will use them to
liquidate a specific liability that appears on the statement of financial position.
4 If making numerous acquisitions of blocks of treasury shares at different prices, a company may use
inventory cost flow assumptions—such as specific identification, average-cost, or FIFO—to identify
the cost at date of reissuance.
5 One recent study of large international companies showed that in the decade ending in March 2013,
companies with the highest dividend payouts showed the highest share price increases. See “Rising
Corporate Cash: What It Means for Investors,” T. Rowe Price Report (Summer 2013) and G.
Zuckerman and A. Kuriloff, “High-Dividend Stocks Gain Appeal,” Wall Street Journal (February 28,
6 If the corporation buys its own outstanding shares, it reduces its contributed capital and distributes
assets to shareholders. If permitted, the corporation could, by purchasing treasury shares at any
price desired, return to the shareholders their investments and leave creditors with little or no
protection against loss.
7 Theoretically, the ex-dividend date is the day after the date of record. However, to allow time for
transfer of the shares, the securities exchanges generally advance the ex-dividend date two to four
days. Therefore, the party who owns the shares on the day prior to the expressed ex-dividend date
receives the dividends. The party who buys the shares on and after the ex-dividend date does not
receive the dividend. Between the declaration date and the ex-dividend date, the market price of the
shares includes the dividend.
8 An alternative approach (required in the United States) is the fair value approach. Under this
approach, for small share dividends (defined as those less than 20–25%) companies transfer the fair

value of the shares issued from retained earnings. This approach was adopted, at least in part, to
influence the share dividend policies of corporations—some of which were possibly misleading
investors as to the real impact of the share dividend. That is, some argued that “many recipients of
share dividends look upon them as distributions of corporate earnings and usually in an amount
equivalent to the fair value of the additional shares received.” (See Stephen A. Zeff, “The Rise of
‘Economic Consequences,’” The Journal of Accountancy (December 1978), pp. 53–66 for a complete
discussion of the evolution of this issue.) IFRS is silent on the accounting for share dividends under
either the par value or fair value method. We show the par value method because it is more
conceptually sound, as it is generally accepted that share dividends are not income for investors.
9 Looking at Illustration 15.16, note that companies may include a number of items in “Accumulated
other comprehensive loss” or “Accumulated other comprehensive income.” Among these items are
“Foreign currency translation adjustments” (covered in advanced accounting), “Unrealized holding
gains and losses for non-trading equity investments” (covered in Chapter 17), and “Unrealized
holding gains or losses on property, plant, and equipment” (covered in Chapter 11), often referred to
as revaluation surplus.
10 Andrew Blackman, “How Well Do You Know … Dividends?” Wall Street Journal (September 10,
2007), p. R5. Also, see payout data at
pages.stern.nyu.edu/~%20adamodar/New_Home_Page/data.html and M. Bird, “Dividend Frenzy
Starts to Cool Down,” Wall Street Journal (November 2, 2016).
11 When preference shares are participating, there may be different agreements as to how the
participation feature is to be executed. However, in the absence of any specific agreement the
following procedure is recommended:
a. After the preference shares are assigned the current year’s dividend, the ordinary shares will
receive a “like” percentage of par value outstanding. In example (3), this amounts to 6 percent
of €400,000.
b. In example (3), shown in Illustration 15A.3, the remainder of the declared dividend is €20,000.
We divide this amount by total par value (€500,000) to find the rate of participation to be
applied to each class of shares. In this case, the rate of participation is 4% (€20,000 ÷
€500,000), which we then multiply by the par value of each class of shares to determine the
amount of participation.
Sources: Ernst and Young, Global IPO Trends Report (Fourth Quarter, 2019); and L. Ventura, “World’s Largest Companies 2019,”
Global Finance (August 29, 2019).