CHAPTER 8
Valuation of Inventories: A Cost-Basis Approach
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe inventory classifications and different inventory systems.
2. Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
3. Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for inventories.
4. Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial statements.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that
are integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 8
As the following opening story indicates, the issues related to accounting
and reporting for inventory are complex. Inappropriate recognition and
measurement of inventory leads to misstatements of key measures of
financial performance. The content and organization of the chapter are as
follows. (Note that Global Accounting Insights related to inventory is
presented in Chapter 9.)
It Should Be Easy, but It Isn’t!
The accounting for inventory should be straightforward. You simply determine
the cost of the inventory and carry this amount forward until the goods are
sold. Unfortunately, the devil is in the details. Questions about whether costs

should be inventoried or expensed are sometimes difficult to answer. And in
some cases, it is even difficult to determine whether inventory has really been
sold. The following are some situations that may test your accounting
knowledge.
Case 1
Chocola Company, a manufacturer of chocolate bars, has a sales promotion
in which customers receive a free chocolate bar for each bar purchased—a
two-for-one special. The sales price of a chocolate bar is €3, and the cost to
produce one bar is €1.
Question: When a chocolate bar is sold to a customer, what is the
inventory cost that should be assigned to that product? Is it €2 in
inventory cost or is it €1 of inventory cost and €1 of selling
expense?
Case 2
Wellness Pharmacy offers manufacturers more attractive product
placement in its stores, for a defined period of time, if they pay a fixed fee
(which is generally independent of the volume of goods sold) for this
upgraded space. These fees are often referred to as slotting fees.
Question: Should Wellness Pharmacy report these slotting fees as
revenue when received, or should these fees reduce the cost of
goods sold of the merchandise?
Case 3
Digital Age, an electronics retailer, purchases computers from a
manufacturer and stores them in warehouses before delivery to its various
retail stores. Digital Age then transfers these computers between internal
warehouses and retail stores, incurring transportation costs.
Question: How should Digital Age account for the transportation
costs both between different internal warehouses and from the
internal warehouses to its retail stores?
Here are the solutions to these questions.
Case 1: The purchase cost of the free chocolate bar is a component of
inventory cost and should be reported as cost of goods sold at the time a
chocolate bar is sold. The cost of goods sold is therefore €2, not €1.
Chocola Company should not charge the free bar to selling expense, as
gross profit will be misstated.

Case 2: Wellness Pharmacy should record the slotting fees as a reduction
of cost of goods sold (and therefore a reduction in inventory value). To
recognize the fee revenue immediately is premature as Wellness
Pharmacy has a performance obligation to provide space for a given period
of time. The fee received is best associated with the inventory sold over the
period of time allocated to the manufacturer.
Case 3: Intermediate transportation costs between different internal
warehouses and to the retail stores should be included in the cost of
inventory. These costs represent an unavoidable part of the supply chain
in getting inventory to the first point of sale.
As indicated, the issues involving inventory are sometimes difficult and
complex. Finding the appropriate answer is important because inventory is
often the largest current asset on a company’s statement of financial position.
Failure to record inventory correctly leads to misstatements of key measures of
financial performance, such as gross profit and net income.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a
targeted summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-
choice questions with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises
and practice problem with solutions, are also available online.
Inventory Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe inventory classifications and different inventory systems.
Classification
Inventories are asset items that a company holds for sale in the ordinary
course of business, or goods that it will use or consume in the production of
goods to be sold. The description and measurement of inventory require
careful attention. The investment in inventories is frequently the largest
current asset of merchandising (retail) and manufacturing businesses.
A merchandising concern, such as Carrefour (FRA), usually purchases its
merchandise in a form ready for sale. It reports the cost assigned to unsold

units left on hand as merchandise inventory. Only one inventory account,
Inventory, appears in the financial statements.
Manufacturing concerns, on the other hand, produce goods to sell to
merchandising firms. Many of the largest businesses are manufacturers, such
as China Petroleum & Chemical Corp. (CHN), Nissan (JPN), Royal
Dutch Shell (NLD), Procter & Gamble (USA), George Weston Ltd.
(CAN), and Nokia (FIN). Although the products they produce may differ,
manufacturers normally have three inventory accounts—Raw Materials, Work
in Process, and Finished Goods.
A company reports the cost assigned to goods and materials on hand but not
yet placed into production as raw materials inventory. Raw materials
include the wood to make a baseball bat or the steel to make a car. These
materials can be traced directly to the end product.
At any point in a continuous production process, some units are only partially
processed. The cost of the raw material for these unfinished units, plus the
direct labor cost applied specifically to this material and a ratable share of
manufacturing overhead costs, constitute the work in process inventory.
Companies report the costs identified with the completed but unsold units on
hand at the end of the fiscal period as finished goods inventory.
Illustration 8.1 contrasts the financial statement presentation of inventories
of Carrefour (FRA) (a merchandising company) with those of Nissan (JPN)
(a manufacturing company). The remainder of the statement of financial
position is essentially similar for the two types of companies.

Merchandising Company
Carrefour
Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet)
Current assets (in millions)
Inventories
Trade receivables
Contract assets
Prepaid expenses and accrued income
Current income tax assets
Other financial assets
Current financial assets
Cash and cash equivalents
Total current assets
Manufacturing Company
Nissan
Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet) March 31, 2019
Current assets (in millions)
Cash on hand and in banks
¥ 1,219,588
Trade notes and accounts receivable
Sales finance receivables
Securities
Merchandise and finished goods
Work in process
Raw materials and supplies
Other

Manufacturing Company
Allowance for doubtful accounts
Total current assets
¥11,613,105
ILLUSTRATION 8.1 Comparison of Presentation of Current Assets
for Merchandising and Manufacturing Companies
A manufacturing company, such as Nissan, also might include a
Manufacturing or Factory Supplies Inventory account. In it, Nissan would
include such items as machine oils, screws, welding supplies, and the like—
supplies that are used in production but are not the primary materials being
processed.
Illustration 8.2 shows the differences in the flow of costs through a
merchandising company and a manufacturing company.

ILLUSTRATION 8.2 Flow of Costs through Manufacturing and
Merchandising Companies
Inventory Cost Flow
Companies that sell or produce goods report inventory and cost of goods sold
at the end of each accounting period. The flow of costs for a company is as
follows. Beginning inventory plus the cost of goods purchased is the cost of
goods available for sale. As goods are sold, they are assigned to cost of goods
sold. Those goods that are not sold by the end of the accounting period
represent ending inventory. Illustration 8.3 shows these relationships.

ILLUSTRATION 8.3 Inventory Cost Flow
Companies use one of two types of systems for maintaining accurate inventory
records for these costs—the perpetual system or the periodic system.
Perpetual System
A perpetual inventory system continuously tracks changes in the Inventory
account. That is, a company records all purchases and sales (issues) of goods
directly in the Inventory account as they occur. The accounting features of a
perpetual inventory system are as follows.
1. Purchases of merchandise for resale or raw materials for production are
debited to Inventory rather than to Purchases.
2. Freight-in is debited to Inventory, not Purchases. Purchase returns and
allowances and purchase discounts are credited to Inventory rather than to
separate accounts.
3. Cost of goods sold is recorded at the time of each sale by debiting Cost of
Goods Sold and crediting Inventory.
4. A subsidiary ledger of individual inventory records is maintained as a
control measure. The subsidiary records show the quantity and cost of
each type of inventory on hand.
The perpetual inventory system provides a continuous record of the balances
in both the Inventory account and the Cost of Goods Sold account.
Periodic System

Under a periodic inventory system, a company determines the quantity of
inventory on hand only periodically, as the name implies. It records all
acquisitions of inventory during the accounting period by debiting the
Purchases account. A company then adds the total in the Purchases account at
the end of the accounting period to the cost of the inventory on hand at the
beginning of the period. This sum determines the total cost of the goods
available for sale during the period.
To compute the cost of goods sold, the company then subtracts the ending
inventory from the cost of goods available for sale. Note that under a
periodic inventory system, the cost of goods sold is a residual
amount that depends on a physical count of ending inventory. This
process is referred to as “taking a physical inventory.” Companies that use the
periodic system take a physical inventory at least once a year.
Comparing Perpetual and Periodic Systems
To illustrate the difference between a perpetual and a periodic system, assume
that Fesmire Company had the following transactions during the current year.
Beginning inventory 100 units at $6 = $ 600
Purchases
900 units at $6 = $5,400
Sales
600 units at $12 = $7,200
Ending inventory
400 units at $6 = $2,400
Fesmire records these transactions during the current year as shown in
Illustration 8.4.

ILLUSTRATION 8.4 Comparative Entries—Perpetual vs. Periodic
When a company uses a perpetual inventory system and a difference exists
between the perpetual inventory balance and the physical inventory count, it
needs a separate entry to adjust the perpetual inventory account. To illustrate,
assume that at the end of the reporting period, the perpetual inventory account
reported an inventory balance of $4,000. However, a physical count indicates
inventory of $3,800 is actually on hand. The entry to record the necessary
write-down is as follows.
Inventory Over and Short 200
Inventory
Perpetual inventory overages and shortages generally represent a
misstatement of cost of goods sold. The difference results from normal and
expected shrinkage, breakage, shoplifting, incorrect recordkeeping, and the
like. Inventory Over and Short therefore adjusts Cost of Goods Sold. In
practice, companies sometimes report Inventory Over and Short in the “Other
income and expense” section of the income statement.
Note that a company using the periodic inventory system does not report the
account Inventory Over and Short. The reason: The periodic method does not
have accounting records against which to compare the physical count. As a

result, a company buries inventory overages and shortages in cost of goods
sold.
Inventory Control
For various reasons, management is vitally interested in inventory planning
and control. Whether a company manufactures or merchandises goods, it
needs an accurate accounting system with up-to-date records. It may lose sales
and customers if it does not stock products in the desired style, quality, and
quantity. Further, companies must monitor inventory levels carefully to limit
the financing costs of carrying large amounts of inventory.
In a perfect world, companies would like a continuous record of both their
inventory levels and their cost of goods sold. The popularity and affordability of
accounting software make the perpetual system cost-effective for many kinds
of businesses. Companies like Loblaw Companies Ltd. (CAN),
Woolworths Ltd. (AUS), and J. Sainsbury (GBR) now incorporate the
recording of sales with optical scanners at the cash register into perpetual
inventory systems.
However, for many companies a complete perpetual system is not cost-
effective. But, most of these companies need current information regarding
their inventory levels, to protect against stockouts or overpurchasing and to aid
in preparation of monthly or quarterly financial data. As a result, these
companies use a modified perpetual inventory system. This system
provides detailed inventory records of increases and decreases in quantities
only—not currency amounts. It is merely a memorandum device outside the
double-entry system, which helps in determining the level of inventory at any
point in time.
Whether a company maintains a complete perpetual inventory in quantities
and currency amounts or a modified perpetual inventory system, it probably
takes a physical inventory once a year. No matter what type of inventory
records companies use, they all face the danger of loss and error. Waste,
breakage, theft, improper entry, failure to prepare or record requisitions, and
other similar possibilities may cause the inventory records to differ from the
actual inventory on hand. Thus, all companies need periodic verification of
the inventory records by actual count, weight, or measurement, with the
counts compared with the detailed inventory records. As indicated earlier, a
company corrects the records to agree with the quantities actually on hand.
If possible, companies should take the physical inventory near the end of their
fiscal year, to properly report inventory quantities in their annual accounting
reports. Because this is not always feasible, physical inventories taken within

two or three months of the year’s end are satisfactory if a company maintains
detailed inventory records with a fair degree of accuracy.1
Determining Cost of Goods Sold
Goods sold (or used) during an accounting period seldom correspond exactly to
the goods bought (or produced) during that period. As a result, inventories
either increase or decrease during the period. Companies must then allocate
the cost of all the goods available for sale (or use) between the goods that were
sold or used and those that are still on hand. The cost of goods available for
sale or use is the sum of (1) the cost of the goods on hand at the beginning of
the period, and (2) the cost of the goods acquired or produced during the
period. The cost of goods sold is the difference between (1) the cost of
goods available for sale during the period, and (2) the cost of goods on hand at
the end of the period. Illustration 8.5 shows these calculations.
Beginning inventory, Jan. 1
Cost of goods acquired or produced during the year
Total cost of goods available for sale
Ending inventory, Dec. 31
Cost of goods sold during the year
ILLUSTRATION 8.5 Computation of Cost of Goods Sold

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Staying Lean
When you drop by a Walmart (USA) store, you are witnessing one of
history’s greatest logistical and operational successes. As one article noted,
the retail giant stocks products in more than 70 countries and at any given
time operates more than 11,000 stores in 27 countries around the world. It
manages an average of $32 billion in inventory.
With these kinds of numbers, having an effective and efficient supply chain
management system and a sound internal control system is imperative. For
example, Walmart uses its buying power in the supply chain to purchase an
increasing proportion of its goods directly from manufacturers and on a
combined basis across geographic borders. Walmart estimates that it saves
5–15% in costs across its supply chain by implementing direct purchasing
on a combined basis for the 15 countries in which it operates. Thus,
Walmart has a good handle on what products it needs to stock, and it gets
the best prices when it purchases.
Walmart also provides a classic example of the use of tight inventory
controls. Department managers use a scanner that when placed over the
bar code corresponding to a particular item, will tell them how many of the
items the store sold yesterday, last week, and over the same period last
year. It will tell them how many of those items are in stock, how many are
on the way, and how many the neighboring Walmart stores are carrying (in
case one store runs out). Walmart’s inventory management practices have
helped it become one of the top-ranked companies in terms of sales.
Sources: J. Birchall, “Walmart Aims to Cut Supply Chain Cost,” Financial Times (January 4,
2010); www.tradegecko.com/blog/incredibly-successful-supply-chain-management-walmart;
and K. Nash, “Wal-Mart Builds Supply Chain to Meet E-Commerce Demands,” Wall Street
Journal (May 7, 2015).
Goods and Costs Included in Inventory
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
Goods Included in Inventory

A company recognizes inventory and accounts payable at the time it controls
the asset. For example, when Lee Ltd. purchases Apple (USA) watches for
resale, Lee records these watches as inventory at the time control passes to
Lee. Control is therefore the key factor in determining when purchases and
sales of a product are recognized.
The IASB indicates that Lee controls the Apple watches when it has the ability
to direct the use of, and obtain substantially all the benefits from, these
watches. Control also includes Lee’s ability to prevent other companies from
directing the use of or receiving the benefits from these watches. As noted in
Chapter 7 in the Lululemon (CAN) example, companies then look to various
indicators to determine whether control has passed.2
One of these indicators, passage of title, is often used to determine control
because the rights and obligations are established legally. For example, when
Lee purchases the Apple watches, legal title belongs to Lee until the watches
are sold to customers. However in some limited cases, other indicators must be
considered because legal title and passage of control do not match.
Goods in Transit
Often, a company such as LG Electronics (KOR) purchases merchandise that
remains in transit—not yet received—at the end of a fiscal period. The
accounting for these shipped goods depends on who controls the merchandise.
In these situations, companies generally determine control based on who has
legal title to the goods by applying the “passage of title” rule. If a supplier ships
goods to LG f.o.b. shipping point, title passes to LG when the supplier
delivers the goods to the common carrier, which acts as an agent for LG (the
abbreviation f.o.b. stands for free on board). If the supplier ships the goods
f.o.b. destination, title passes to LG only when it receives the goods from the
common carrier. “Shipping point” and “destination” are often designated by a
particular location, for example, f.o.b. Seoul.
When LG obtains legal title to goods, it must record them as purchases in that
fiscal period, assuming a periodic inventory system. Thus, goods shipped to LG
f.o.b. shipping point, but in transit at the end of the period, belong to LG. It
should show the purchase in its records because legal title to these goods
passed to LG upon shipment of the goods. To disregard such purchases results
in understating inventories and accounts payable in the statement of financial
position, and understating purchases and ending inventories in the income
statement.
Consigned Goods

Companies market certain products through consignment. Under this
arrangement, a company like Williams Art Gallery (the consignor) ships
various art merchandise to Sotheby’s Holdings (USA) (the consignee), who
acts as Williams’ agent in selling the consigned goods. Sotheby’s agrees to
accept the goods without any liability, except to exercise due care and
reasonable protection from loss or damage, until it sells the goods to a third
party. When Sotheby’s sells the goods, it remits the revenue, less a selling
commission and expenses incurred in accomplishing the sale, to Williams.
Goods out on consignment remain the property of the consignor (Williams in
the example above). Although Sotheby’s has physical possession of the goods,
it does not have control because legal title and the risks and rewards of
ownership remain with Williams. Williams thus includes the goods in its
inventory at purchase price or production cost. Occasionally, and only for a
significant amount, the consignor shows the inventory out on consignment as
a separate item. Sometimes a consignor reports the inventory on consignment
in the notes to the financial statements. For example, Eagle Clothes, Inc.
(USA) reported the following related to consigned goods: “Inventories consist
of finished goods shipped on consignment to customers of the Company’s
subsidiary April-Marcus, Inc.”
The consignee makes no entry to the inventory account for goods received.
Remember, these goods remain the property of the consignor until sold. In
fact, the consignee should be extremely careful not to include any of the goods
consigned as a part of inventory. Additional discussion related to consignments
is provided in Chapter 18.
Special Sales Agreements
As we indicated earlier, transfer of legal title is the general guideline used to
determine whether a company should include an item in inventory.
Unfortunately, transfer of legal title and the underlying substance of the
transaction sometimes do not match. For example, legal title may have passed
to the purchaser, but the seller of the goods retains control of the inventory.
Two special sales situations are illustrated here to indicate the types of
problems companies encounter in practice:
1. Sales with repurchase agreement.
2. Sales with high rates of return.
Sales with Repurchase Agreement

Sometimes a company finances its inventory without reporting either a liability
or the inventory on its statement of financial position. This approach, often
referred to as a repurchase (or product financing) agreement, usually involves
a transfer (sale) with either an implicit or explicit repurchase agreement.
To illustrate, Hill Enterprises transfers (“sells”) inventory to Chase plc. and
simultaneously agrees to repurchase this merchandise at a specified price over
a specified period of time. Chase then uses the inventory as collateral and
borrows against it. Chase uses the loan proceeds to pay Hill, which repurchases
the inventory in the future. Chase employs the proceeds from repayment to
meet its loan obligation.
The essence of this transaction is that Hill is financing its inventory—and
retaining control—even though it transferred to Chase technical legal title to
the merchandise. By structuring a transaction in this manner, Hill may avoid
personal property taxes in certain jurisdictions. Other advantages of this
transaction for Hill are the removal of the current liability from its statement
of financial position and the ability to manipulate income. For Chase, the
purchase of the goods may solve an inventory liquidation problem (discussed
later), or Chase may enter into a similar reciprocal agreement at a later date.
These arrangements are often described in practice as “parking
transactions” (see Underlying Concepts). In this situation, Hill simply
parks the inventory on Chase’s statement of financial position for a short
period of time. Generally, when a repurchase agreement exists, Hill should
report the inventory and related liability on its books. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) The
reason? Hill has retained control of the asset; that is, Hill still owns the asset.
Underlying Concepts
Recognizing revenue at the time the inventory is “parked” violates the
revenue recognition principle. That is, a performance obligation is not met
because control has not been transferred to the buyer.
Sales with High Rates of Return
In industries such as publishing, music, toys, and sporting goods, formal or
informal agreements often exist that permit purchasers to return inventory for
a full or partial refund.
To illustrate, Quality Publishing Company sells textbooks to Campus
Bookstores with an agreement that Campus may return for full credit any

books not sold. Historically, Campus Bookstores returned approximately 25
percent of the textbooks from Quality Publishing. How should Quality
Publishing report its sales transactions?
The key question to determine whether a sale occurs is: Has Quality Publishing
transferred control of these goods to Campus Bookstore? Because Campus
Bookstore now has the ability to direct the use of and obtain substantially all
the benefits from these textbooks, these transactions are normally recorded as
a sale by Quality Publishing. In addition, the normal indicators for transfer of
control, such as passage of legal title, loss of physical control, and transfer of
risks and rewards of ownership, appear to have occurred. However, Quality
Publishing must also recognize that only partial control has transferred to
Campus Bookstore. Therefore, Quality Publishing does the following.
1. Record sales revenue at the amount it expects to receive from the
transaction. This transaction involves variable consideration and
therefore the transaction price is adjusted to recognize that a portion of
these textbooks will be returned.
2. Establish an estimated inventory return account to recognize
that some of its textbooks will be returned. The reason for recording
estimated inventory is that control over a significant number of the
textbooks has not passed to Campus Bookstore.
In other words, control does pass from seller to buyer for a majority of the
textbooks but not all of them. Quality Publishing therefore records an
estimated inventory return amount to recognize that fact. If returns are
unpredictable and uncertain, Quality Publishing should not consider the
textbooks sold and should not remove the goods from its inventory. This
example illustrates the difficulty of determining when control has passed in
situations where substantial returns are involved. [2] We provide expanded
discussion of special sales agreements and returns in Chapter 18.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
A Retail Apocalypse!
As the size and scope of ecommerce businesses such as Amazon.com
(USA) and Alibaba (CHN) continue to expand, traditional retailers with
brick-and-mortar stores are struggling to keep up and, in some cases, to
remain in business.
The most common response is to adopt an omnichannel approach. An
omnichannel retailer provides multiple customer pathways that include
online and mobile phone, as well as physical opportunities to learn about
products, compare them, and eventually make a purchase. For example, an
omnichannel merchant can allow a customer to comparison-shop via its
website, to order the product on his or her phone, and then to pick up the
merchandise in the store that same day.
The movement in this direction is essential for traditional retail merchants,
due to the growth in online purchasing coupled with rapid delivery. The
threat to retail has become so significant that an estimated 75,000 stores
are expected to close during the next few years. But, this also means that
retailers will need to push out older and slow moving inventories, often by
aggressive price cutting, to make way for a leaner and more focused
product selection in their stores.
These changes have resulted in challenging times for retailers and in better
prices and selections for consumers. In most markets, the reality is that
when one sector wins, another has to lose. While the eventual winners are
hard to predict, it would appear that companies that can master both
omnichannel and supply chain management have the best likelihood to
survive and possibly thrive.
Sources: Jennifer Smith, “Inventory Reduction Push and J.C. Penney Thins Margins,” Wall
Street Journal Online (November 15, 2018); Abha Bhattarai, “ ‘Retail Apocalypse’ Now: Analysts
Say More than 75,000 U.S. Stores Could Be Doomed,” Washington Post Online (April 10, 2019);
and Lauren Thomas, “JCPenney Is Fading. Nordstrom Is Struggling. Walmart Is Thriving. That
Sums Up What’s Happening in Retail,” www.cnbc.com (July 24, 2019).
Costs Included in Inventory
One of the most important problems in dealing with inventories concerns the
dollar amount at which to carry the inventory in the accounts. Companies
generally account for the acquisition of inventories, like other
assets, on a cost basis.

Product Costs
Product costs are those costs that “attach” to the inventory. As a result, a
company records product costs in the Inventory account. These costs are
directly connected with bringing the goods to the buyer’s place of business and
converting such goods to a salable condition. Such charges generally include
(1) costs of purchase, (2) costs of conversion, and (3) “other costs” incurred in
bringing the inventories to the point of sale and in salable condition.
Costs of purchase include:
1. The purchase price.
2. Import duties and other taxes.
3. Transportation costs.
4. Handling costs directly related to the acquisition of the goods. [3]
Conversion costs for a manufacturing company include direct materials, direct
labor, and manufacturing overhead costs. Manufacturing overhead costs
include indirect materials, indirect labor, and various costs, such as
depreciation, taxes, insurance, and utilities.3
“Other costs” include those incurred to bring the inventory to its present
location and condition ready to sell, such as the cost to design a product for
specific customer needs. For example, if a customer of Lenovo (CHN)
requests that computers to be sold in Europe have an additional power adapter
that is compatible with European power sources, the cost to design a
multisource-adapter would be included in the cost of the computer.
It seems proper also to allocate to inventories a share of any purchasing costs
or expenses of a purchasing department, storage costs, and other costs incurred
in storing or handling the goods before their sale. However, because of the
practical difficulties involved in allocating such costs and expenses, companies
usually exclude these items in valuing inventories.
Period Costs
Period costs are those costs that are indirectly related to the acquisition or
production of goods. Period costs such as selling expenses and, under ordinary
circumstances, general and administrative expenses are therefore not included
as part of inventory cost.
Yet, conceptually, these expenses are as much a cost of the product as the
initial purchase price and related freight charges attached to the product. Why
then do companies exclude these costs from inventoriable items? Because

companies generally consider selling expenses as more directly related to the
cost of goods sold than to the unsold inventory. In addition, period costs,
especially administrative expenses, are so unrelated or indirectly related to the
immediate production process that any allocation is purely arbitrary.4
Interest is another period cost. Companies usually expense interest costs
associated with getting inventories ready for sale. Supporters of this approach
argue that interest costs are really a cost of financing. Others contend that
interest costs incurred to finance activities associated with readying
inventories for sale are as much a cost of the asset as materials, labor, and
overhead. Therefore, they reason, companies should capitalize interest costs.
The IASB ruled that companies should capitalize interest costs
related to assets constructed for internal use or assets produced as
discrete projects (such as ships or real estate projects) for sale or
lease. [7]5 The IASB emphasized that these discrete projects should take
considerable time, entail substantial expenditures, and be likely to involve
significant amounts of interest cost. Thus, a company should not capitalize
interest costs for inventories that it routinely manufactures or otherwise
produces in large quantities on a repetitive basis. In this case, the
informational benefit does not justify the cost.
Treatment of Purchase Discounts
Purchase or trade discounts are reductions in the selling prices granted to
customers. These discounts may be used to provide an incentive for a first-time
purchase or as a reward for a large order. In some cases, incentives are
provided to encourage early payment. There has been some diversity in
practice regarding the accounting for these discounts, with some companies
recording the discount as a reduction in inventory while others treated the
discount as revenue. However, the IASB requires these discounts to be
recorded as a reduction from the cost of inventories. [8]
With respect to the bookkeeping related to purchase discounts, the use of a
Purchase Discounts account in a periodic inventory system indicates that
the company is reporting its purchases and accounts payable at the gross
amount. If a company uses this gross method, it reports purchase discounts
as a deduction from purchases on the income statement.
Another approach is to record the purchases and accounts payable at an
amount net of the cash discount. In this approach, the company records
failure to take a purchase discount within the discount period in a Purchase
Discounts Lost account. If a company uses this net method, it considers
purchase discounts lost as a financial expense and reports it in the “Other

income and expense” section of the income statement. This treatment is
considered better for two reasons. (1) It provides a correct reporting of the cost
of the asset and related liability and (2) It can measure management
inefficiency by holding management responsible for discounts not taken.
To highlight the difference between the gross and net methods, assume the
transactions shown in Illustration 8.6.
Many believe that the somewhat more complicated net method is not justified
by the resulting benefits (see Underlying Concepts). This could account for
the widespread use of the less logical but simpler gross method. In addition,
some contend that management is reluctant to report in the financial
statements the amount of purchase discounts lost. For homework purposes,
unless otherwise specified, use the gross method to record purchase discounts.
Underlying Concepts
Not using the net method because of resultant difficulties is an example of
the application of the cost constraint.
ILLUSTRATION 8.6 Entries under Gross and Net Methods
Which Cost Flow Assumption to Adopt?
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for inventories.

During any given fiscal period, companies typically purchase merchandise at
several different prices. If a company prices inventories at cost and it made
numerous purchases at different unit costs, which cost should it use?
Conceptually, a specific identification of the given items sold and unsold seems
optimal. Therefore, the IASB requires use of the specific identification method
in cases where inventories are not ordinarily interchangeable, or for
goods and services produced or segregated for specific projects. For
example, an inventory of single-family homes is a good candidate for use of the
specific identification method. Unfortunately, for most companies, the specific
identification method is not practicable. Only in situations where inventory
turnover is low, unit price is high, or inventory quantities are small are the
specific identification criteria met. In other cases, the cost of inventory should
be measured using one of two cost flow assumptions: (1) first-in, first-out
(FIFO) or (2) average-cost. [9]
To illustrate these cost flow methods, assume that Call-Mart SpA had the
following transactions in its first month of operations.
Date
Purchases
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2
2,000 @ €4.00
2,000 units
March 15 6,000 @ €4.40
8,000 units
March 19
4,000 units
4,000 units
March 30 2,000 @ €4.75
6,000 units
From this information, Call-Mart computes the ending inventory of
6,000 units and the cost of goods available for sale (beginning
inventory + purchases) of €43,900 [(2,000 @ €4.00) + (6,000 @ €4.40) +
(2,000 @ €4.75)]. The question is, which price or prices should it assign to the
6,000 units of ending inventory? The answer depends on which cost flow
assumption it uses.
Specific Identification
Specific identification calls for identifying each item sold and each item in
inventory. A company includes in cost of goods sold the costs of the specific
items sold. It includes in inventory the costs of the specific items on hand. This
method may be used only in instances where it is practical to separate
physically the different purchases made. As a result, most companies only use
this method when handling a relatively small number of costly, easily
distinguishable items. In the retail trade, this includes some types of jewelry,
fur coats, automobiles, and some furniture. In manufacturing, it includes
special orders and many products manufactured under a job cost system.

To illustrate, assume that Call-Mart’s 6,000 units of inventory consists of
1,000 units from the March 2 purchase, 3,000 from the March 15 purchase,
and 2,000 from the March 30 purchase. Illustration 8.7 shows how Call-
Mart computes the ending inventory and cost of goods sold.
Date
No. of Units
Unit
Cost
Total
Cost
March 2
March 15
March 30
Ending inventory
Cost of goods available for sale (computed in
previous section)
Deduct: Ending inventory
Cost of goods sold
ILLUSTRATION 8.7 Specific Identification Method
This method appears ideal. Specific identification matches actual costs against
actual revenue. Thus, a company reports ending inventory at actual cost. In
other words, under specific identification the cost flow matches the
physical flow of the goods. On closer observation, however, this method
has certain deficiencies in addition to its lack of practicability in many
situations.
Some argue that specific identification allows a company to manipulate net
income. For example, assume that a wholesaler purchases identical plywood
early in the year at three different prices. When it sells the plywood, the
wholesaler can select either the lowest or the highest price to charge to
expense. It simply selects the plywood from a specific lot for delivery to the
customer. A business manager, therefore, can manipulate net income by
delivering to the customer the higher- or lower-priced item, depending on
whether the company seeks lower or higher reported earnings for the period.
Another problem relates to the arbitrary allocation of costs that sometimes
occurs with specific inventory items. For example, a company often faces
difficulty in relating freight charges, storage costs, and discounts directly to a
given inventory item. This results in allocating these costs somewhat
arbitrarily, leading to a “breakdown” in the precision of the specific
identification method.6

Average-Cost
As the name implies, the average-cost method prices items in the inventory
on the basis of the average cost of all similar goods available during the period.
To illustrate use of the periodic inventory method (amount of inventory
computed at the end of the period), Call-Mart computes the ending inventory
and cost of goods sold using a weighted-average method as shown in
Illustration 8.8.
Date of Invoice
No. of Units
Unit Cost
Total Cost
March 2
March 15
March 30
Total goods available
Weighted-average cost per unit
= €4.39
Inventory in units
6,000 units
Ending inventory
6,000 × €4.39 = €26,340
Cost of goods available for sale
Deduct: Ending inventory
Cost of goods sold
ILLUSTRATION 
Weighted-Average 
Method—Periodic
Inventory
In computing the average cost per unit, Call-Mart includes the beginning
inventory, if any, both in the total units available and in the total cost of goods
available.
Companies use the moving-average method with perpetual inventory
records. Illustration 8.9 shows the application of the average-cost method
for perpetual records.

Date
Purchased
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2 (2,000 @
(2,000 @
March
(6,000 @
(8,000 @
March
(4,000 @ €4.30)
(4,000 @
March
(2,000 @
(6,000 @
ILLUSTRATION 8.9 Moving-Average Method—Perpetual Inventory
In this method, Call-Mart computes a new average unit cost each time it
makes a purchase. For example, on March 15, after purchasing 6,000 units for
€26,400, Call-Mart has 8,000 units costing €34,400 (€8,000 plus €26,400) on
hand. The average unit cost is €34,400 divided by 8,000, or €4.30. Call-Mart
uses this unit cost in costing withdrawals until it makes another purchase. At
that point, Call-Mart computes a new average unit cost. Accordingly, the
company shows the cost of the 4,000 units withdrawn on March 19 at €4.30,
for a total cost of goods sold of €17,200. On March 30, following the purchase
of 2,000 units for €9,500, Call-Mart determines a new unit cost of €4.45, for
an ending inventory of €26,700.
Companies often use average-cost methods for practical rather than conceptual
reasons. These methods are simple to apply and objective. They are not as
subject to income manipulation as some of the other inventory pricing
methods. In addition, proponents of the average-cost methods reason that
measuring a specific physical flow of inventory is often impossible. Therefore,
it is better to cost items on an average-price basis. This argument is particularly
persuasive when dealing with similar inventory items.
First-In, First-Out (FIFO)
The first-in, first-out (FIFO) method assumes that a company uses goods
in the order in which it purchases them. In other words, the FIFO method
assumes that the first goods purchased are the first used (in a
manufacturing concern) or the first sold (in a merchandising concern). The
inventory remaining must therefore represent the most recent purchases.
To illustrate, assume that Call-Mart uses the periodic inventory system. It
determines its cost of the ending inventory by taking the cost of the most
recent purchase and working back until it accounts for all units in the

inventory. Call-Mart determines its ending inventory and cost of goods sold as
shown in Illustration 8.10.
Date
No. of Units
Unit Cost Total Cost
March 30
March 15
Ending inventory
Cost of goods available for sale
Deduct: Ending inventory
Cost of goods sold
ILLUSTRATION 8.10 FIFO Method—Periodic Inventory
If Call-Mart instead uses a perpetual inventory system in quantities and euros,
it attaches a cost figure to each withdrawal. Then, the cost of the 4,000 units
removed on March 19 consists of the cost of the items purchased on March 2
and March 15. Illustration 8.11 shows the inventory on a FIFO basis
perpetual system for Call-Mart.
ILLUSTRATION 8.11 FIFO Method—Perpetual Inventory
Here, the ending inventory is €27,100, and the cost of goods sold is €16,800
[(2,000 @ €4.00) + (2,000 @ €4.40)].
Notice that in these two FIFO examples, the cost of goods sold (€16,800) and
ending inventory (€27,100) are the same. In all cases where FIFO is used,
the amount reported for ending inventory and cost of goods sold
would be the same at the end of the month whether a perpetual or
periodic system is used. Why? Because the same costs will always be first in
and, therefore, first out. This is true whether a company computes cost of
goods sold as it sells goods throughout the accounting period (the perpetual
system) or as a residual at the end of the accounting period (the periodic
system).

One objective of FIFO is to approximate the physical flow of goods. When the
physical flow of goods is actually first-in, first-out, the FIFO method closely
approximates specific identification. At the same time, it prevents
manipulation of income. With FIFO, a company cannot pick a certain cost item
to charge to expense.
Another advantage of the FIFO method is that the ending inventory is close to
current cost. Because the first goods in are the first goods out, the ending
inventory amount consists of the most recent purchases. This is particularly
true with rapid inventory turnover. This approach generally approximates
replacement cost on the statement of financial position when price changes
have not occurred since the most recent purchases.
However, the FIFO method fails to match current costs against current
revenues on the income statement. A company charges the oldest costs against
the more current revenue, possibly distorting gross profit and net income.
Companies often combine inventory methods. For example, Nestlé (CHE)
uses FIFO for its raw materials inventories and prices the remainder using
average-cost. For high inventory turnover in certain product lines, a company
cannot justify FIFO’s additional recordkeeping and expense. In such cases, a
company often uses average-cost because it is easy to compute.7
Although a company may use a variety of inventory methods to assist in
accurate computation of net income, once it selects a pricing method, it
must apply it consistently thereafter. If conditions indicate that the
inventory pricing method in use is unsuitable, the company must seriously
consider all other possibilities before selecting another method. It should
clearly explain any change and disclose its effect in the financial statements.8
Inventory Valuation Methods—Summary Analysis
The preceding sections of this chapter described a number of inventory
valuation methods. Here, we present a brief summary of the two commonly
used inventory cost flow methods to show the effects these valuation methods
have on the financial statements. This comparison assumes periodic inventory
procedures and the following selected data.
Selected Data
Beginning cash balance
Beginning retained earnings
Beginning inventory:
4,000 units @ € 3 €12,000
Purchases:
6,000 units @ € 4 €24,000

Sales:
5,000 units @ €12 €60,000
Operating expenses
Income tax rate
Illustration 8.12 shows the comparative results on net income of the use of
average-cost and FIFO.
Average-Cost
FIFO
Sales
Cost of goods sold
18,000a
16,000b
Gross profit
Operating expenses
Income before taxes
Income taxes (40%)
Net income
a4,000 @ €3 = €12,000 b4,000 @ €3 = €12,000
6,000 @ €4 = 24,000
1,000 @ €4 = 4,000
€36,000 ÷ 10,000 = €3.60
€3.6 × 5,000 = €18,000
ILLUSTRATION 8.12 Comparative Results of Average-Cost and
FIFO Methods
Notice that gross profit and net income are higher under FIFO compared to
average-cost because prices are increasing.
Illustration 8.13 shows the final balances of selected items at the end of the
period.

Inventory
Gross
Profit
Taxes
Net Income
Retained
Earnings
Cash
Average-
Cost
(5,000 ×
+
€20,200a
FIFO
(5,000 ×
+
€19,400a
aCash at
Year-End
=
Beg.
Balance
+
Sales
−Purchases −Operating
expenses
−
Taxes
Average-
cost—
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
FIFO—
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
ILLUSTRATION 8.13 Balances of Selected Items under Alternative
Inventory Valuation Methods
The average-cost method results in the higher cash balance at year-end
(because taxes are lower). This example assumes that prices are rising. The
opposite result occurs if prices are declining.
Effect of Inventory Errors
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial statements.
Items incorrectly included or excluded in determining cost of goods sold
through inventory misstatements will result in errors in the financial
statements. Let’s look at two cases, assuming a periodic inventory system.
Ending Inventory Misstated
What would happen if Lenovo (CHN) correctly records its beginning
inventory and purchases, but fails to include some items in ending inventory?

In this situation, Illustration 8.14 shows the resultant effects on the
financial statements at the end of the period.
Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
Inventory
Understated Cost of goods sold Overstated
Retained earnings Understated
Working capital
Understated Net income
Understated
Current ratio
Understated
ILLUSTRATION 8.14 Financial Statement Effects of Misstated
Ending Inventory
If ending inventory is understated, working capital and the current ratio are
understated. If cost of goods sold is overstated, then net income is understated.
To illustrate the effect on net income over a two-year period (2022–2023),
assume that Yei Chen Ltd. understates its ending inventory by HK$10,000 (in
thousands) in 2022; all other items are correctly stated. The effect of this error
is to decrease net income in 2022 and to increase net income in 2023. The
error is counterbalanced (offset) in 2023 because beginning inventory is
understated and net income is overstated. As Illustration 8.15 shows, the
income statement misstates the net income figures for both 2022 and 2023,
although the total for the two years is correct (see Underlying Concepts).
Underlying Concepts
When inventory is misstated, its presentation lacks representational
usefulness.

ILLUSTRATION 8.15 Effect of Ending Inventory Error on Two
Period
If Yei Chen overstates ending inventory in 2022, the reverse effect occurs.
Inventory, working capital, current ratio, and net income are overstated and
cost of goods sold is understated. The effect of the error on net income will be
counterbalanced in 2023, but the income statement misstates both years’ net
income figures.
Purchases and Inventory Misstated
Suppose that Bishop Company does not record as a purchase certain goods that
it owns and does not count them in ending inventory. Illustration 8.16
shows the effect on the financial statements (assuming this is a purchase on
account).

Statement of Financial Position
Income Statement
Inventory
Understated Purchases
Understated
Retained earnings No effect
Cost of goods sold No effect
Accounts payable Understated Net income
No effect
Working capital
No effect
Inventory (ending) Understated
Current ratio
Overstated
ILLUSTRATION 8.16 Financial Statement Effects of Misstated
Purchases and Inventory
Omission of goods from purchases and inventory results in an understatement
of inventory and accounts payable in the statement of financial position; it also
results in an understatement of purchases and ending inventory in the income
statement. However, the omission of such goods does not affect net income for
the period. Why not? Because Bishop understates both purchases and ending
inventory by the same amount—the error is thereby offset in cost of goods
sold. Total working capital is unchanged, but the current ratio is overstated
because of the omission of equal amounts from inventory and accounts
payable.
To illustrate the effect on the current ratio, assume that Bishop understated
accounts payable and ending inventory by $40,000. Illustration 8.17 shows
the understated and correct data.
Purchases and Ending Inventory
Understated
Purchases and Ending Inventory
Correct
Current assets
$120,000 Current assets
Current liabilities
$ 40,000 Current liabilities
Current ratio
3 to 1 Current ratio
2 to 1
ILLUSTRATION 8.17 Effects of Purchases and Ending Inventory
Errors
The understated data indicate a current ratio of 3 to 1, whereas the correct ratio
is 2 to 1. Thus, understatement of accounts payable and ending inventory can
lead to a “window dressing” of the current ratio. That is, Bishop can make the
current ratio appear better than it is.
If Bishop overstates both purchases (on account) and ending inventory, then
the effects on the statement of financial position are exactly the reverse. The
financial statements overstate inventory and accounts payable, and understate
the current ratio. The overstatement does not affect cost of goods sold and net

income because the errors offset one another. Similarly, working capital is not
affected.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of proper inventory measurement in
presenting accurate financial statements. For example, one women’s apparel
maker had accounting irregularities that wiped out one year’s net income and
caused a restatement of the prior year’s earnings. One reason: It inflated
inventory and deflated cost of goods sold. In another case, a company had to
restate its income by $1.7 million because an accountant in the antenna
manufacturing division overstated the ending inventory, thereby reducing its
cost of sales.
APPENDIX 8A LIFO Cost Flow Assumption
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *5
Describe the LIFO cost flow assumption.
As we discussed in the chapter, under IFRS, LIFO is not permitted for financial
reporting purposes. In prohibiting LIFO, the IASB noted that use of LIFO
results in inventories being recognized in the statement of financial position at
amounts that may bear little relationship to recent cost levels of inventories.
While some argued for use of LIFO because it may better match the costs of
recently purchased inventory with current prices, the Board concluded that it is
not appropriate to allow an approach that results in a measurement of profit or
loss for the period that is inconsistent with the measurement of inventories in
the statement of financial position. [12] Nonetheless, LIFO is permitted for
financial reporting purposes in the United States, it is permitted for tax
purposes in some countries, and its use can result in significant tax savings. In
this appendix, we provide an expanded discussion of LIFO inventory
procedures.
Last-In, First-Out (LIFO)
The last-in, first-out (LIFO) method matches the cost of the last goods
purchased against revenue. To illustrate, we extend the Call-Mart example
introduced in Illustration 8.7. Recall that Call-Mart SpA had the following
transactions in its first month of operations.
Date
Purchases
Sold or Issued
Balance
March 2
2,000 @ €4.00
2,000 units

March 15 6,000 @ €4.40
8,000 units
March 19
4,000 units
4,000 units
March 30 2,000 @ €4.75
6,000 units
If Call-Mart uses a periodic inventory system, it assumes that the cost of the
total quantity sold or issued during the month comes from the most
recent purchases. Call-Mart prices the ending inventory by using the total
units as a basis of computation and disregards the exact dates of sales or
issuances. For example, Call-Mart would assume that the cost of the 4,000
units withdrawn absorbed the 2,000 units purchased on March 30 and 2,000
of the 6,000 units purchased on March 15. Illustration 8A.1 shows how Call-
Mart computes the inventory and related cost of goods sold, using the periodic
inventory method.
Date of Invoice
No. of Units Unit Cost Total Cost
March 2
March 15
Ending inventory
Goods available for sale
Deduct: Ending inventory
Cost of goods sold
ILLUSTRATION 8A.1 LIFO Method—Periodic Inventory
If Call-Mart keeps a perpetual inventory record in quantities and euros, use of
the LIFO method results in different ending inventory and cost of goods
sold amounts than the amounts calculated under the periodic
method. Illustration 8A.2 shows these differences under the perpetual
method.
ILLUSTRATION 8A.2 LIFO Method—Perpetual Inventory

The month-end periodic inventory computation presented in Illustration 8A.1
(inventory €25,600 and cost of goods sold €18,300) shows a different amount
than the perpetual inventory computation (inventory €26,300 and cost of
goods sold €17,600). The periodic system (with ending inventory determined
by a physical count at the end of the month) matches the total withdrawals for
the month with the total purchases for the month in applying the last-in, first-
out method. In contrast, the perpetual system matches each withdrawal with
the immediately preceding purchases. In effect, the periodic computation
assumed that Call-Mart included the cost of the goods that it purchased on
March 30 in the sale or issue on March 19.
Inventory Valuation Methods—Summary Analysis
With the addition of the LIFO example, we can revisit the summary analysis
presented in the chapter, which was based on the following data. Recall that
this example assumes periodic inventory procedures.
Beginning cash balance
Beginning retained earnings
Beginning inventory:
4,000 units @ € 3 €12,000
Purchases:
6,000 units @ € 4 €24,000
Sales:
5,000 units @ €12 €60,000
Operating expenses
Income tax rate
Illustration 8A.3 shows the comparative results on net income of the use of
Average-Cost, FIFO, and LIFO.

Average-Cost
FIFO
LIFO
Sales
Cost of goods
sold
18,000a
16,000b
20,000c
Gross profit
Operating
expenses
Income before
taxes
Income taxes
Net income
a4,000 @ €3 =
b4,000 @ €3 =
c5,000 @ €4 =
6,000 @ €4 =
1,000 @ €4 =
€36,000 ÷ 10,000 =
€ 3.60 × 5,000 =
ILLUSTRATION 8A.3 Comparative Results of Average-Cost, FIFO,
and LIFO Methods
Notice that gross profit and net income are lowest under LIFO, highest under
FIFO, and somewhere in the middle under average-cost.
Illustration 8A.4 shows the final balances of selected items at the end of the
period.

Inventory
Gross
Profit
Taxes
Net Income Retained
Earnings
Cash
Average-
Cost
(5,000 ×
+
€20,200a
FIFO
(5,000 ×
+
€19,400a
LIFO
(4,000 ×
(1,000 ×
+
€21,000a
aCash at
Year-End
=
Beg.
Balance
+
Sales
−Purchases −Operating
expenses
−
Taxes
Average-
cost—
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
FIFO—
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
LIFO—
= €7,000 + €60,000 −€24,000 −€10,000
−
ILLUSTRATION 8A.4 Balances of Selected Items under Alternative
Inventory Valuation Methods
LIFO results in the highest cash balance at year-end (because taxes are lower).
This example assumes that prices are rising. The opposite result occurs if
prices are declining.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
average-cost method
consigned goods

cost of goods available for sale or use
cost of goods sold
finished goods inventory
first-in, first-out (FIFO) method
f.o.b. destination
f.o.b. shipping point
gross method
inventories
*last-in, first-out (LIFO) method
merchandise inventory
modified perpetual inventory system
moving-average method
net method
net of the cash discount
period costs
periodic inventory system
perpetual inventory system
product costs
Purchase Discounts
raw materials inventory
specific identification
weighted-average method
work in process inventory
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe inventory classifications and different inventory
systems.
Only one inventory account, Inventory, appears in the financial statements of a
merchandising concern. A manufacturer normally has three inventory
accounts: Raw Materials, Work in Process, and Finished Goods. Companies

report the cost assigned to goods and materials on hand but not yet placed into
production as raw materials inventory. They report the cost of the raw
materials on which production has been started but not completed, plus the
direct labor cost applied specifically to this material and a ratable share of
manufacturing overhead costs, as work in process inventory. Finally, they
report the costs identified with the completed but unsold units on hand at the
end of the fiscal period as finished goods inventory.
A perpetual inventory system maintains a continuous record of inventory
changes in the Inventory account. That is, a company records all purchases and
sales (issues) of goods directly in the Inventory account as they occur. Under a
periodic inventory system, companies determine the quantity of inventory
on hand only periodically. A company debits a Purchases account, but the
Inventory account remains the same. It determines cost of goods sold at the
end of the period by subtracting ending inventory from cost of goods available
for sale. A company ascertains ending inventory by physical count.
2 Identify the goods and costs included in inventory.
Companies record purchases of inventory when they obtain legal title to the
goods (generally when they receive the goods). Shipping terms must be
evaluated to determine when legal title passes, and careful consideration must
be made for cost of goods sold on consignment and sales with repurchase
agreements and high rates of return.
Product costs are those costs that attach to the inventory and are recorded in
the Inventory account. Such charges include freight charges on (1) costs of
purchase, (2) costs of conversion, and (3) “other costs” incurred in bringing the
inventories to the point of sale and in salable condition. Period costs are
those costs that are indirectly related to the acquisition or production of goods.
These changes, such as selling expense and general and administrative
expenses, are therefore not included as part of inventory cost.
3 Compare the cost flow assumptions used to account for
inventories.
The IASB requires use of the specific identification method in cases where
inventories are not ordinarily interchangeable or for goods and services
produced or segregated for specific projects. Only in situations where inventory
turnover is low, unit price is high, or inventory quantities are small are the
specific identification criteria met. In other cases companies use one of two
cost flow assumptions. (1) Average-cost prices items in the inventory on the

basis of the average cost of all similar goods available during the period. (2)
First-in, first-out (FIFO) assumes that a company uses goods in the order in
which it purchases them. The inventory remaining must therefore represent
the most recent purchases.
4 Determine the effects of inventory errors on the financial
statements.
If the company misstates ending inventory: (1) In the statement of financial
position, the inventory and retained earnings will be misstated, which will lead
to miscalculation of the working capital and current ratio, and (2) in the
income statement, the cost of goods sold and net income will be misstated. If
the company misstates purchases (and related accounts payable) and
inventory: (1) Statement of financial position, the inventory and accounts
payable will be misstated, which will lead to miscalculation of the current ratio,
and (2) in the income statement, purchases and ending inventory will be
misstated.
*5 Describe the LIFO cost flow assumption.
The LIFO method assumes that the last items purchased are the first items
sold. This method matches the costs of the most recently purchased items with
revenues in the period. In times of rising prices, use of the LIFO method
results in lower net income and income taxes and higher cash flow.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises
with solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Mayhew AG has the following inventory, purchases, and sales data for the
month of March. The physical inventory count on March 31 shows 500 units
on hand.
Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00 € 800
Purchases: March 10 500 units @ €4.50 2,250
March 20 400 units @ €4.75 1,900

March 30 300 units @ €5.00 1,500
Sales:
March 15 500 units
March 25 400 units
Instructions
a. Under a periodic inventory system, determine the cost of inventory
on hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March under (1)
FIFO and (2) average-cost.
b. Under a perpetual inventory system, determine the cost of inventory
on hand at March 31 and the cost of goods sold for March under (1)
FIFO and (2) average-cost.
Solution
a. The cost of goods available for sale is €6,450, as follows.
Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00 € 800
Purchases: March 10
500 units @ €4.50
March 20
400 units @ €4.75
March 30
300 units @ €5.00
Total:
Under a periodic inventory system, the cost of goods sold under each
cost flow method is as follows.
1. 
FIFO Method
Ending inventory:
Date
Units Unit Cost Total Cost
March 30
March 20
Cost of goods sold: €6,450 − €2,450 = €4,000
2. 
Average-Cost Method
Average unit cost: €6,450 ÷ 1,400 = €4.607
Ending inventory: 500 × €4.607 = €2,303.50
Cost of goods sold: €6,450 − €2,303.50 = €4,146.50
b. The cost of goods available for sale is €6,450, as follows.

Inventory: March 1
200 units @ €4.00
Purchases: March 10
500 units @ €4.50
March 20
400 units @ €4.75
March 30
300 units @ €5.00
Total:
Under a perpetual inventory system, the cost of goods sold under each
cost flow method is as follows.
1. 
2. 
Moving-Average Cost Method
Date
Purchases
Cost of Goods
Sold
Balance
March
(200 @
March
(500 @ €4.50)
(700 @
March
(500 @ €4.357)
(200 @
March
(400 @ €4.75)
(600 @
March
(400 @ €4.618)
(200 @

March
(300 @ €5.00)
(500 @
Ending inventory
Cost of goods sold: €2,179 +
€1,847 = €4,026
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data
Analytics Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are
available for practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in
the appendix to the chapter.
Questions
1. In what ways are the inventory accounts of a merchandising company
different from those of a manufacturing company?
2. Why should inventories be included in (a) a statement of financial position
and (b) the computation of net income?
3. What is the difference between a perpetual inventory and a physical
inventory? If a company maintains a perpetual inventory, should its physical
inventory at any date be equal to the amount indicated by the perpetual
inventory records? Why?
4. Mishima Ltd. indicated in a recent annual report that approximately ¥19
million of merchandise was received on consignment. Should Mishima, Inc.
report this amount on its statement of financial position? Explain.
5. What is a product financing arrangement? How should product financing
arrangements be reported in the financial statements?
6. Where, if at all, should the following items be classified on a statement of
financial position?
a. Goods out on approval to customers.
b. Goods in transit that were recently purchased f.o.b. destination.
c. Land held by a realty firm for sale.
d. Raw materials.
e. Goods received on consignment.

f. Manufacturing supplies.
7. Yang Specialty Products has a generous return policy. Yang gives customers
a 30-day trial period, after which they can return the product for a full refund if
not satisfied. Under what conditions can Yang consider the inventory sold
when the generous return policy is offered?
8. Holland Home Electronics transfers (sells) inventory to Oslo ASA with right
of return within the next 3 months. Advise Holland management on the
conditions under which it can consider goods sold under this plan.
9. Define “cost” as applied to the valuation of inventories.
10. Distinguish between product costs and period costs as they relate to
inventory.
11. Honda (JPN) is considering alternative methods of accounting for the
cash discounts it takes when paying suppliers promptly. One method suggested
was to report these discounts as financial income when payments are made.
Comment on the propriety of this approach.
12. Wysocki Company has incurred borrowing costs as part of its
manufacturing process of its inventory. Should these costs be included in the
cost of the inventory? Explain.
13. Biestek Meat-Packing SA historically has experienced a 0.5% spoilage rate
associated with production of its Polish sausage line of products. However, due
to installation of new meat-grinding equipment, higher than usual spoilage of
€45,000 was experienced on the Polish sausage line in a recent month. How
should Biestek account for both the usual and increased spoilage in
determining the cost of its sausage inventory?
14. Zonker NV purchases 500 units of an item at an invoice cost of €30,000.
What is the cost per unit? If the goods are shipped f.o.b. shipping point and the
freight bill was €1,500, what is the cost per unit if Zonker pays the freight
charges? If these items were bought on 2/10, n/30 terms and the invoice and
the freight bill were paid within the 10-day period, what would be the cost per
unit?
15. Specific identification is sometimes said to be the ideal method of
assigning cost to inventory and to cost of goods sold. Briefly indicate the
arguments for and against this method of inventory valuation.
16. FIFO and weighted-average methods are often used instead of specific
identification for inventory valuation purposes. Compare these methods with
the specific identification method, discussing the theoretical propriety of each
method in the determination of income and asset valuation.

17. In the third quarter of 2023, David Beckham, the controller for Swiss
Precision Company, discovers an error in ending inventory counts for the
December 31, 2022, cutoff. After Beckham reports the error in a management
meeting, the president for Swiss argues that this error in the prior year is of no
consequence to the 2023 financial statements. How should Beckham respond
to the president?
18. At the statement of financial position date, Clarkson Company held title to
goods in transit amounting to $214,000. This amount was omitted from the
purchases figure for the year and also from the ending inventory. What is the
effect of this omission on the net income for the year as calculated when the
books are closed? What is the effect on the company’s statement of financial
position? Is materiality a factor in determining whether an adjustment for this
item should be made?
*19. As compared with the FIFO method of costing inventories, does the LIFO
method result in a larger or smaller net income in a period of rising prices?
What is the comparative effect on net income in a period of falling prices?
Brief Exercises