CHAPTER 10
Acquisition and Disposition of Property, Plant, and
Equipment
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify property, plant, and equipment and its related costs.
2. Discuss the accounting problems associated with the capitalization of
borrowing costs.
3. Explain accounting issues related to acquiring and valuing plant assets.
4. Describe the accounting treatment for costs subsequent to acquisition.
5. Describe the accounting treatment for the disposal of property, plant, and
equipment.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 10
As we indicate in the following opening story, market watchers monitor
carefully capital expenditures on property, plant, and equipment. In this
chapter, we discuss the proper accounting for the acquisition, use, and
disposition of property, plant, and equipment. The content and organization of
the chapter are as follows. (Note that Global Accounting Insights related to
property, plant, and equipment is presented in Chapter 11.)

Watch Your Spending
Investments in long-lived assets, such as property, plant, and equipment, are
important elements in many companies’ statements of financial position. Along
with research and development, these investments are the driving force for many
companies in generating cash flows. Property, plant, and equipment information
reported on a company’s statement of financial position directly affects such items
as total assets, depreciation expense, cash flows, and net income. As a result,
companies are careful regarding their spending level for capital expenditures
(capex).
Determining the proper level of capital expenditures in many companies is
challenging. Expenditures that are too much or too little run the risk of decreasing
cash flows, losing competitive position, and diminishing pricing power. The
recession in Europe, the financial crisis in 2008 and its lingering effects, and
China’s reduced level of spending are now slowing down the growth in capital
expenditures. Western Europe, Latin America, and the Asian-Pacific countries are
all showing signs of capital expenditure fatigue. The adjacent graph shows that
global capital expenditures are highly variable and tend to follow the trends in
revenue and EBITDA growth.
Even in good times, the issues related to capital expenditures are complex. The
following areas and subsequent questions have led to many sleepless nights for
company managers:
1. Spending volume—how much should be spent?
2. Capital allocation—what should it be spent on?
3. Project execution—how does spending transform into real returns?

Answers to these questions are not easy, and failure to answer them correctly can
lead to loss of profitability. It also follows that these issues are of extreme interest
to users of financial statements. As mentioned previously, too much or too little
capital spending by companies can lead to decreased cash flows, loss of competitive
position, and diminished pricing power. Relationships between capital-
expenditures-to-sales and capital-expenditures-to-depreciation, as well as free cash
flow, provide insight into the underlying financial flexibility of a company.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a
targeted summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice
questions with annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice
problem with solutions, are also available online.
Property, Plant, and Equipment
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Identify property, plant, and equipment and its related costs.
Companies like Hon Hai Precision (TWN), Tata Steel (IND), and Royal Dutch
Shell (GBR and NLD) use assets of a durable nature. Such assets are called
property, plant, and equipment. Other terms commonly used are plant assets
and fixed assets. We use these terms interchangeably. Property, plant, and
equipment is defined as tangible assets that are held for use in production or
supply of goods and services, for rentals to others, or for administrative purposes;
they are expected to be used during more than one period. [1] (See the
Authoritative Literature References section near the end of the chapter.) Property,
plant, and equipment therefore includes land, building structures (offices,
factories, warehouses), and equipment (machinery, furniture, tools). The major
characteristics of property, plant, and equipment are as follows.
1. They are acquired for use in operations and not for resale. Only assets
used in normal business operations are classified as property, plant, and
equipment. For example, an idle building is more appropriately classified
separately as an investment. Property, plant, and equipment held for possible
price appreciation are classified as investments. In addition, property, plant,
and equipment held for sale or disposal are separately classified and reported
on the statement of financial position. Land developers or subdividers classify
land as inventory.

2. They are long-term in nature and usually depreciated. Property, plant,
and equipment yield services over a number of years. Companies allocate the
cost of the investment in these assets to future periods through periodic
depreciation charges. The exception is land, which is depreciated only if a
material decrease in value occurs, such as a loss in fertility of agricultural land
because of poor crop rotation, drought, or soil erosion.
3. They possess physical substance. Property, plant, and equipment are
tangible assets characterized by physical existence or substance. This
differentiates them from intangible assets, such as patents or copyrights.
Unlike raw material, however, property, plant, and equipment do not
physically become part of a product held for resale.
Acquisition of Property, Plant, and Equipment
Most companies use historical cost as the basis for valuing property, plant, and
equipment (see Underlying Concepts). Historical cost measures the cash or
cash equivalent price of obtaining the asset and bringing it to the location and
condition necessary for its intended use.
Underlying Concepts
Fair value is relevant to inventory but less so for property, plant, and
equipment which, consistent with the going concern assumption, are held for
use in the business, not for sale like inventory.
Companies recognize property, plant, and equipment when the cost of the asset can
be measured reliably and it is probable that the company will obtain future
economic benefits. [2] For example, when Starbucks (USA) purchases coffee
makers for its operations, these costs are reported as assets because they can be
reliably measured and benefit future periods. However, when Starbucks makes
ordinary repairs to its coffee machines, it expenses these costs because the primary
period benefited is only the current period.
In general, companies report the following costs as part of property, plant, and
equipment. [3]1
1. Purchase price, including import duties and non-refundable purchase taxes,
less trade discounts and rebates. For example, British Airways (GBR)
indicates that aircraft are stated at the fair value of the consideration given
after offsetting manufacturing credits.
2. Costs attributable to bringing the asset to the location and condition necessary
for it to be used in a manner intended by the company. For example, when
Skanska AB (SWE) purchases heavy machinery from Caterpillar (USA), it
capitalizes the costs of purchase, including delivery costs.2

Companies value property, plant, and equipment in subsequent periods using
either the cost method or fair value (revaluation) method. Companies can apply the
cost or fair value method to all the items of property, plant, and equipment or to a
single class or classes of property, plant, and equipment. For example, a company
may value land (one class of asset) after acquisition using the revaluation
accounting method and, at the same time, value buildings and equipment (other
classes of assets) at cost.
Most companies use the cost method—it is less expensive to use because the cost
of an appraiser is not needed. In addition, the revaluation (fair value) method
generally leads to higher asset values, which means that companies report higher
depreciation expense and lower net income. This chapter discusses the cost
method; we illustrate the (fair value) revaluation method in Chapter 11.
Cost of Land
All expenditures made to acquire land and ready it for use are considered part of
the land cost. Thus, when Auchan (FRA) or ÆON (JPN) purchases land on which
to build a new store, land costs typically include (1) the purchase price; (2) closing
costs, such as title to the land, attorney’s fees, and recording fees; (3) costs incurred
in getting the land in condition for its intended use, such as grading, filling,
draining, and clearing; (4) assumption of any liens, mortgages, or encumbrances on
the property; and (5) any additional land improvements that have an indefinite life.
For example, when ÆON purchases land for the purpose of constructing a building,
it considers all costs incurred up to the excavation for the new building as land
costs. Removal of old buildings—clearing, grading, and filling—is a land
cost because these activities are necessary to get the land in condition for
its intended purpose. ÆON treats any proceeds from getting the land ready for
its intended use, such as salvage receipts on the demolition of an old building or
the sale of cleared timber, as reductions in the price of the land.
In some cases, when ÆON purchases land, it may assume certain obligations on
the land, such as back taxes or liens. In such situations, the cost of the land is the
cash paid for it, plus the encumbrances. In other words, if the purchase price of the
land is ¥50,000,000 cash but ÆON assumes accrued property taxes of ¥5,000,000
and liens of ¥10,000,000, its land cost is ¥65,000,000.
ÆON also might incur special assessments for local improvements, such as
pavements, street lights, sewers, and drainage systems. It should charge these costs
to the Land account because they are relatively permanent in nature. That is, after
installation, they are maintained by the local government. In addition, ÆON should
charge any permanent improvements it makes, such as landscaping, to the Land
account. It records separately any improvements with limited lives, such as
private driveways, walks, fences, and parking lots, to the Land Improvements
account. These costs are depreciated over their estimated lives.

Generally, land is part of property, plant, and equipment. However, if the
major purpose of acquiring and holding land is speculative, a company more
appropriately classifies the land as an investment. If a real estate concern holds
the land for resale, it should classify the land as inventory.
In cases where land is held as an investment, what accounting treatment should be
given for taxes, insurance, and other direct costs incurred while holding the land?
Many believe these costs should be capitalized. The reason: They are not generating
revenue from the investment at this time. Companies generally use this approach
except when the asset is currently producing revenue (such as rental property).
Cost of Buildings
The cost of buildings should include all expenditures related directly to their
acquisition or construction. These costs include (1) materials, labor, and overhead
costs incurred during construction, and (2) professional fees and building permits.
Generally, companies contract others to construct their buildings. Companies
consider all costs incurred, from excavation to completion, as part of the building
costs.
But how should companies account for an old building that is on the site of a newly
proposed building? Is the cost of removal of the old building a cost of the land or a
cost of the new building? Recall that if a company purchases land with an old
building on it, then the cost of demolition less its residual value is a cost
of getting the land ready for its intended use and relates to the land
rather than to the new building. In other words, all costs of getting an asset
ready for its intended use are costs of that asset.
It follows that any costs that are not directly attributable to getting the building
ready for its intended use should not be capitalized. For example, start-up costs,
such as promotional costs related to the building’s opening or operating losses
incurred initially due to low sales, should not be capitalized. Also, general
administrative expenses (such as the cost of the finance department) should not be
allocated to the cost of the building.
Cost of Equipment
The term “equipment” in accounting includes delivery equipment, office
equipment, machinery, furniture and fixtures, furnishings, factory equipment, and
similar fixed assets. The cost of such assets includes the purchase price, freight and
handling charges incurred, insurance on the equipment while in transit, cost of
special foundations if required, assembling and installation costs, and costs of
conducting trial runs. Costs thus include all expenditures incurred in acquiring the
equipment and preparing it for use.
Self-Constructed Assets

Occasionally, companies construct their own assets. Determining the cost of such
machinery and other fixed assets can be a problem. Without a purchase price or
contract price, the company must allocate costs and expenses to arrive at the cost of
the self-constructed asset. Materials and direct labor used in construction pose
no problem. A company can trace these costs directly to work and material orders
related to the fixed assets constructed.
However, the assignment of indirect costs of manufacturing creates special
problems. These indirect costs, called overhead or burden, include power, heat,
light, insurance, property taxes on factory buildings and equipment, factory
supervisory labor, depreciation of fixed assets, and supplies.
Companies can handle overhead in one of two ways:
1. Assign no fixed overhead to the cost of the constructed asset. The
major argument for this treatment is that overhead is generally fixed in nature.
As a result, this approach assumes that the company will have the same costs
regardless of whether or not it constructs the asset. Therefore, to charge a
portion of the overhead costs to the equipment will normally reduce current
expenses and consequently overstate income of the current period. However,
the company would assign to the cost of the constructed asset variable
overhead costs that increase as a result of the construction.
2. Assign a portion of all overhead to the construction process. This
approach, called a full-costing approach, assumes that costs attach to all
products and assets manufactured or constructed. Under this approach, a
company assigns a portion of all overhead to the construction process, as it
would to normal production. Advocates say that failure to allocate overhead
costs understates the initial cost of the asset and results in an inaccurate
future allocation.
Companies should assign to the asset a pro rata portion of the fixed overhead to
determine its cost. Companies use this treatment extensively because many believe
that it results in a better matching of costs with revenues. Abnormal amounts of
wasted material, labor, or other resources should not be added to the cost of the
asset. [4]
If the allocated overhead results in recording construction costs in excess of the
costs that an outside independent producer would charge, the company should
record the excess overhead as a period loss rather than capitalize it. This avoids
capitalizing the asset at more than its fair value. Under no circumstances should a
company record a “profit on self-construction.”
Borrowing Costs During Construction

LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Discuss the accounting problems associated with the capitalization of
borrowing costs.
The proper accounting for borrowing costs3 has been a long-standing
controversy. Three approaches have been suggested to account for the interest
incurred in financing the construction of property, plant, and equipment:
1. Capitalize no borrowing costs during construction. Under this
approach, interest is considered a cost of financing and not a cost of
construction. Some contend that if a company had used equity financing rather
than debt, it would not incur this cost. The major argument against this
approach is that the use of cash, whatever its source, has an associated implicit
interest cost, which should not be ignored.
2. Charge construction with all borrowing costs of funds employed,
whether identifiable or not. This method maintains that the cost of
construction should include the cost of financing, whether by cash, debt, or
equity. Its advocates say that all costs necessary to get an asset ready for its
intended use, including borrowing costs, are part of the asset’s cost. Interest,
whether actual or imputed, is a cost, just as are labor and materials. A major
criticism of this approach is that imputing the cost of equity capital is
subjective and outside the framework of an historical cost system.
3. Capitalize only the actual borrowing costs incurred during
construction. This approach agrees in part with the logic of the second
approach—that interest is just as much a cost as are labor and materials. But,
this approach capitalizes only borrowing costs incurred through debt financing.
(That is, it does not try to determine the cost of equity financing.) Under this
approach, a company that uses debt financing will have an asset of higher cost
than a company that uses equity financing. Some consider this approach
unsatisfactory because they believe the cost of an asset should be the same
whether it is financed with cash, debt, or equity.
Illustration 10.1 shows how a company might add borrowing costs (if any) to the
cost of the asset under the three capitalization approaches.

ILLUSTRATION 10.1 Capitalization of Borrowing Costs
IFRS requires the third approach—capitalizing actual interest (with modifications)
(see Underlying Concepts). This method follows the concept that the historical
cost of acquiring an asset includes all costs (including borrowing costs) incurred to
bring the asset to the condition and location necessary for its intended use. The
rationale for this approach is that during construction, the asset is not generating
revenues. Therefore, a company should defer (capitalize) borrowing costs. Once
construction is complete, a company can utilize the asset in its operations. At this
point, the company should report borrowing as an expense in the determination of
net income. It follows that the company should expense any borrowing cost
incurred in purchasing an asset that is ready for its intended use. [6]
Underlying Concepts
The objective of capitalizing borrowing costs is to obtain a measure of
acquisition cost that reflects a company’s total investment in the asset and to
charge that cost to future periods benefitted.
To implement the capitalization approach for borrowing costs, companies consider
three items:
1. Qualifying assets.
2. Capitalization period.
3. Amount to capitalize.
Qualifying Assets
To qualify for the capitalization of borrowing costs, assets must require
a substantial period of time to get them ready for their intended use or
sale. A company capitalizes borrowing costs starting at the beginning of the
capitalization period (described in the next section). Capitalization continues until
the company substantially readies the asset for its intended use.

Assets that qualify for borrowing cost capitalization include assets under
construction for a company’s own use (including buildings, plants, and large
machinery) and assets intended for sale or lease that require a substantial period of
time to produce (e.g., ships or real estate developments).4
Examples of assets that do not qualify for interest capitalization are (1) assets that
are in use or ready for their intended use, and (2) inventories that are produced
over a short period of time.
Capitalization Period
The capitalization period is the period of time during which a company
capitalizes borrowing costs. It begins with the presence of three conditions:
1. Expenditures for the asset are being incurred.
2. Activities that are necessary to get the asset ready for its intended use or sale
are in progress.
3. Borrowing cost is being incurred.
Capitalization continues as long as these three conditions are present. The
capitalization period ends when the asset is substantially complete and ready for its
intended use.
Amount to Capitalize
The amount of borrowing cost to be capitalized varies depending on whether there
is specific debt that has been incurred to fund the project or whether the project
is being funded from the general debt obligations of the company.
When the project is funded by specific debt, the amount capitalized is the actual
borrowing costs incurred during the capitalization period offset by any investment
income on temporary investments of funds made available from the borrowings. To
illustrate the issues related to the capitalization of borrowing costs funded by
specific debt, assume that on November 1, 2021, Shalla Company contracted Pfeifer
Construction Co. to construct a building for $1,400,000 on land costing $100,000
(purchased from the contractor and included in the first payment). Shalla made the
following payments to the construction company during 2022.
January 1 March 1
May 1
December 31
Total
Pfeifer Construction completed the building, ready for occupancy, on December 31,
2022. Shalla had a 15 percent, three-year, $1,500,000, note to finance purchase of
land and construction of the building, dated December 31, 2021, with interest
payable annually on December 31. During 2021, a portion of the proceeds from the

borrowing that had not yet been expended in the project were invested and earned
$60,000 in interest income.
The project began on January 1 and was completed on December 31, so the
capitalization period was the full year of 2022. The amount of borrowing costs to be
capitalized for 2022 would be computed as shown in Illustration 10.2.
Borrowing costs ($1,500,000 × .15) $225,000
Investment income
Borrowing costs to be capitalized
ILLUSTRATION 10.2 Total Borrowing Costs
Shalla would make the following entries during the year.
January 1
Land
Buildings (or Construction in Process)
Cash
 
March 1
Buildings
Cash
 
May 1
Buildings
Cash
 
December 31
Buildings
Cash
 
Buildings (Capitalized Borrowing Cost)
Cash
 
Cash
Buildings (Capitalized Borrowing Cost)  
When the project is funded by general debt, some additional calculations and steps
are included in the process. To illustrate, assume the same facts as the previous
illustration, but, instead of any specific debt, the project is funded by the general
debt of the company. Assume that Shalla had the following two debt obligations
outstanding during 2022:
1. 10 percent, $1,000,000, 5-year note payable, dated December 31, 2018, with
interest payable annually on December 31.

2. 12 percent, $1,500,000, 10-year bonds issued December 31, 2017, with interest
payable annually on December 31.
When a project is funded by general debt, the company will need to determine the
average carrying amount of the project during the period. This can be computed
as shown in Illustration 10.3.
Expenditures
 
 
Date
Amount
Capitalization Period*
Average Carrying Amount
January 1
12/12
March 1
10/12
May 1
8/12
December 31
0/12
Totals
* The capitalization period is the number of months between when the expenditure is made and the end of the
year or the end of the project, whichever occurs first.
ILLUSTRATION 10.3 Average Carrying Amount Calculations
The second amount that is needed when borrowing costs from general debt are
being used, and there is more than one general debt obligation, is the weighted-
average borrowing cost. This amount is called the capitalization rate and is
computed as follows.
[.10 × ($1,000,000 ÷ $2,500,000)] + [.12 × ($1,500,000 ÷ $2,500,000)] = 11.2%
By combining these two amounts, the amount of borrowing cost available for
capitalization is now computed.
$820,000 × .112 = $91,840
The final step when the borrowing cost of general debt is used is to apply the
constraint that the amount capitalized cannot exceed the actual
borrowing costs incurred during the period. In 2022, total borrowing costs
were $280,000 [($1,000,000 × .10) + ($1,500,000 × .12)]. The amount capitalized
will be lower of actual, or the amount computed by multiplying the average
carrying amount by the capitalization rate. In this case, Shalla will capitalize
All of the other entries presented above would be the same except for the interest
entries on December 31, which would be as follows.
December 31
Buildings (Capitalized Borrowing Cost)
Interest Expense ($280,000 − $91,840) 188,160  

Cash
 
The final possibility is that the project is funded by a blend of specific debt and
general debt. To illustrate this case, assume that Shalla has the following debt
outstanding during 2022.
Specific Construction Debt
1. 15 percent, $750,000, 3-year note to finance purchase of land and construction
of the building, dated December 31, 2021, with interest payable annually on
December 31. Idle funds from this borrowing were invested during early 2022
and earned $40,000 in investment income.
Other Debt
2. 10 percent, $500,000, 5-year note payable, dated December 31, 2018, with
interest payable annually on December 31.
3. 12 percent, $1,500,000, 10-year bonds issued December 31, 2017, with interest
payable annually on December 31.
In this case, the expenditures are first allocated to the specific debt to the extent
possible. Then, the remainder of the expenditures are allocated to the general debt,
as shown in Illustration 10.4.
Date
Expenditure
Amount
Allocated to
Specific
Borrowings
Amount
Allocated to
General
Borrowings
Capitalization
Period
Average
Carrying
Amount
January 1
$
 
March 1
 
May 1
8/12
December
0/12
Totals
ILLUSTRATION 10.4 Allocation of Expenditures
The borrowing costs of the specific debt for this project is $72,500 based on the
borrowing costs of $112,500 ($1,500,000 × .15) less the investment income of
The capitalization rate on the general debt is 11.5 percent {[(.10 × $500,000 ÷
$2,000,000)] + [.12 × ($1,500,000 ÷ $2,000,000)]}. This results in a potential
amount of borrowing costs to be capitalized of $23,000 ($200,000 × .115). Since
this amount is lower than the actual borrowing costs of the general debt of
$230,000 [($500,000 × .10) + ($1,500,000 × .12)], $23,000 will be capitalized

from the general borrowings. The total amount to be capitalized is shown in
Illustration 10.5.
Interest costs from specific debt
Investment income from specific debt funds (40,000)
Interest costs from general debt
Total borrowing costs capitalized for 2022
ILLUSTRATION 10.5 Summary of Borrowing Costs
At December 31, the following entry would be made:
December 31
Buildings (Capitalized Borrowing Cost) ($112,500 + $23,000) 135,500  
Interest Expense ($230,000 − $23,000)
Cash ($112,500 + $230,000)
 
Cash
Buildings (Capitalized Borrowing Cost)
 
Disclosures
For each period, an entity will disclose both the amount of borrowing costs
capitalized during the period and the capitalization rate used to determine the
amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalization. Illustration 10.6 provides
an example from the financial statements of Royal Dutch Shell (GBR and NLD).

Royal Dutch Shell
6 INTEREST EXPENSE
($ million)
Interest incurred and similar charges
Less: interest capitalized
Other net losses on fair value hedges of debt
Accretion expense
Total
The rate applied in determining the amount of interest capitalized in 2018 was 4%
(2017: 3%; 2016: 3%).
ILLUSTRATION 10.6 Borrowing Costs Disclosure
Valuation of Property, Plant, and Equipment
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain accounting issues related to acquiring and valuing plant assets.
As with other assets, companies should record property, plant, and
equipment at the fair value of what they give up or at the fair value of the
asset received, whichever is more clearly evident. However, the process of
asset acquisition sometimes obscures fair value. For example, if a company buys
land and buildings together for one price, how does it determine separate values for
the land and buildings? We examine these types of accounting problems in the
following sections.
Cash Discounts
When a company purchases plant assets subject to cash discounts for prompt
payment, how should it report the discount? If it takes the discount, the company
should consider the discount as a reduction in the purchase price of the asset. But
should the company reduce the asset cost even if it does not take the discount?
Two points of view exist on this question. One approach considers the discount—
whether taken or not—as a reduction in the cost of the asset. The rationale for this
approach is that the real cost of the asset is the cash or cash equivalent price of the

asset. In addition, some argue that the terms of cash discounts are so attractive that
failure to take them indicates management error or inefficiency.
With respect to the second approach, its proponents argue that failure to take the
discount should not always be considered a loss. The terms may be unfavorable, or
it might not be prudent for the company to take the discount. At present,
companies use both methods, though most prefer the former method. (For
homework purposes, treat the discount, whether taken or not, as a reduction in the
cost of the asset.)
Deferred-Payment Contracts
Companies frequently purchase plant assets on long-term credit contracts, using
notes, mortgages, bonds, or equipment obligations. To properly reflect cost,
companies account for assets purchased on long-term credit contracts at
the present value of the consideration exchanged between the
contracting parties at the date of the transaction.
For example, Greathouse Company purchases an asset today in exchange for a
$10,000 zero-interest-bearing note payable four years from now. The company
would not record the asset at $10,000. Instead, the present value of the $10,000
note establishes the exchange price of the transaction (the purchase price of the
asset). Assuming an appropriate interest rate of 9 percent at which to discount this
single payment of $10,000 due four years from now, Greathouse records this asset
at $7,084.30 ($10,000 × .70843). [See Table 6.2 for the present value of a single
sum, PV = $10,000 (PVF4,9%).]
When no interest rate is stated or if the specified rate is unreasonable, the company
imputes an appropriate interest rate. The objective is to approximate the interest
rate that the buyer and seller would negotiate at arm’s length in a similar
borrowing transaction. In imputing an interest rate, companies consider such
factors as the borrower’s credit rating, the amount and maturity date of the note,
and prevailing interest rates. The company uses the cash exchange price of
the asset acquired (if determinable) as the basis for recording the asset
and measuring the interest element.
To illustrate, Sutter AG purchases a specially built robot spray painter for its
production line. The company issues a €100,000, five-year, zero-interest-bearing
note to Wrigley Robotics for the new equipment. The prevailing market rate of
interest for obligations of this nature is 10 percent. Sutter is to pay off the note in
five €20,000 installments, made at the end of each year. Sutter cannot readily
determine the fair value of this specially built robot. Therefore, Sutter
approximates the robot’s value by establishing the fair value (present value) of the
note. Entries for the date of purchase and dates of payments, plus computation of
the present value of the note, are as follows.

Date of Purchase
Equipment
75,816*  
Notes Payable  
*Present value of note = €20,000 (PVF-OA5,10%)
 
= €20,000 (3.79079); Table 6.4
 
= €75,816
End of First Year
Interest Expense 7,582  
Notes Payable
Cash
 
Interest expense in the first year under the effective-interest approach is €7,582
(€75,816 × .10). The entry at the end of the second year to record interest and
principal payment is as follows.
End of Second Year
Interest Expense
Notes Payable
Cash
 
Interest expense in the second year under the effective-interest approach is €6,340
[(€75,816 − €12,418) × .10].
If Sutter did not impute an interest rate for the deferred-payment contract, it would
record the asset at an amount greater than its fair value. In addition, Sutter would
understate interest expense in the income statement for all periods involved.
Lump-Sum Purchases
A common challenge in valuing fixed assets arises when a company purchases a
group of assets at a single lump-sum price. When this occurs, the company
allocates the total cost among the various assets on the basis of their relative fair
values. The assumption is that costs will vary in direct proportion to fair value. This
is the same principle that companies apply to allocate a lump-sum cost among
different inventory items.
To determine fair value, a company should use valuation techniques that are
appropriate in the circumstances. In some cases, a single valuation technique will
be appropriate. In other cases, multiple valuation approaches might have to be
used.5

To illustrate, Norduct Homes, Inc. decides to purchase several assets of a small
heating concern, Comfort Heating, for $80,000. Comfort Heating is in the process
of liquidation. Its assets sold are as follows.
 
Book Value Fair Value
Inventory
Land
Building
 
Norduct Homes allocates the $80,000 purchase price on the basis of the relative
fair values (assuming specific identification of costs is impracticable), shown in
Illustration 10.7.
Inventory
× $80,000 = $20,000
Land
× $80,000 = $20,000
Building
× $80,000 = $40,000
ILLUSTRATION 10.7 Allocation of Purchase Price—Relative Fair Value
Basis
Issuance of Shares
When companies acquire property by issuing securities, such as ordinary shares,
the par or stated value of such shares fails to properly measure the property cost. If
trading of the shares is active, the market price of the shares issued is a fair
indication of the cost of the property acquired. The shares are a good
measure of the current cash equivalent price.
For example, Upgrade Living Co. decides to purchase some adjacent land for
expansion of its carpeting and cabinet operation. In lieu of paying cash for the land,
the company issues to Deedland Company 5,000 ordinary shares (par value $10)
that have a market price of $12 per share. Upgrade Living Co. records the following
entry.
Land (5,000 × $12)
Share Capital—Ordinary
 
Share Premium—Ordinary  

If the company cannot determine the fair value of the ordinary shares exchanged
(based on a market price), it may estimate the fair value of the property. It then
uses the value of the property as the basis for recording the asset and issuance of
the ordinary shares.
Exchanges of Non-Monetary Assets
The proper accounting for exchanges of non-monetary assets, such as property,
plant, and equipment, is controversial.6 Some argue that companies should account
for these types of exchanges based on the fair value of the asset given up or the fair
value of the asset received, with a gain or loss recognized. Others believe that they
should account for exchanges based on the recorded amount (book value) of the
asset given up, with no gain or loss recognized. Still others favor an approach that
recognizes losses in all cases but defers gains in special situations.
Ordinarily, companies account for the exchange of non-monetary assets on the
basis of the fair value of the asset given up or the fair value of the asset
received, whichever is clearly more evident. [7] Thus, companies should
recognize immediately any gains or losses on the exchange. The rationale for
immediate recognition is that most transactions have commercial substance,
and therefore gains and losses should be recognized.
Meaning of Commercial Substance
As indicated above, fair value is the basis for measuring an asset acquired in a non-
monetary exchange if the transaction has commercial substance. An exchange has
commercial substance if the future cash flows change as a result of the
transaction. That is, if the two parties’ economic positions change, the transaction
has commercial substance.
For example, Andrew Co. exchanges some of its equipment for land held by
Roddick Inc. It is likely that the timing and amount of the cash flows arising for the
land will differ significantly from the cash flows arising from the equipment. As a
result, both Andrew Co. and Roddick Inc. are in different economic positions.
Therefore, the exchange has commercial substance, and the companies recognize a
gain or loss on the exchange.
What if companies exchange similar assets, such as one truck for another truck?
Even in an exchange of similar assets, a change in the economic position of the
company can result. For example, let’s say the useful life of the truck received is
significantly longer than that of the truck given up. The cash flows for the trucks
can differ significantly. As a result, the transaction has commercial substance, and
the company should use fair value as a basis for measuring the asset received in the
exchange.
However, it is possible to exchange similar assets but not have a significant
difference in cash flows. That is, the company is in the same economic position as

before the exchange. In that case, the company generally defers gains and losses on
the exchange.
As we will see in the following examples, use of fair value generally results in
recognizing a gain or loss at the time of the exchange. Consequently, companies
must determine if the transaction has commercial substance. To make this
determination, they must carefully evaluate the cash flow characteristics of the
assets exchanged.7
Illustration 10.8 summarizes asset exchange situations and the related
accounting.
ILLUSTRATION 10.8 Accounting for Exchanges
As Illustration 10.8 indicates, the accounting for gains and losses depends on
whether the exchange has commercial substance. If the exchange has commercial
substance, the company recognizes the gains and losses immediately. However, if
the exchange lacks commercial substance, it defers recognition of gains and losses.
To illustrate the accounting for these different types of transactions, we examine
various loss and gain exchange situations.
Exchanges—Loss Situation (Has Commercial Substance)
When a company exchanges non-monetary assets and a loss results, the company
recognizes the loss if the exchange has commercial substance. The rationale:
Companies should not value assets at more than their cash equivalent price. If the
loss were deferred, assets would be overstated.
For example, Information Processing SA trades its used machine for a new model
at Jerrod Business Solutions NV. The exchange has commercial substance. The
used machine has a book value of €8,000 (original cost €12,000 less €4,000
accumulated depreciation) and a fair value of €6,000. The new model lists for
€16,000. Jerrod gives Information Processing a trade-in allowance of €9,000 for
the used machine. Information Processing computes the cost of the new asset as
shown in Illustration 10.9.

List price of new machine
Less: Trade-in allowance for used machine
Cash payment due
Fair value of used machine
Cost of new machine
ILLUSTRATION 10.9 Computation of Cost of New Machine
Information Processing records this transaction as follows.
Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Loss on Disposal of Equipment
Equipment
 
Cash
 
Illustration 10.10 shows the verification of the loss on the disposal of the used
machine.
Fair value of used machine
Less: Book value of used machine
Loss on disposal of used machine €2,000
ILLUSTRATION 10.10 Computation of Loss on Disposal of Used
Machine
Why did Information Processing not use the trade-in allowance or the book value
of the old asset as a basis for the new equipment? The company did not use the
trade-in allowance because it included a price concession (similar to a price
discount). Few individuals pay list price for a new car or other new equipment.
Dealers such as Jerrod often inflate trade-in allowances on the used car or
equipment so that actual selling prices fall below list prices. To record the asset at
list price would state it at an amount in excess of its cash equivalent price because
of the new asset’s inflated list price. Similarly, use of book value in this situation
would overstate the value of the new machine by €2,000.8
Exchanges—Gain Situation (Has Commercial Substance)
Now let’s consider the situation in which a non-monetary exchange has
commercial substance and a gain is realized. In such a case, a company usually
records the cost of a non-monetary asset acquired in exchange for another non-
monetary asset at the fair value of the asset given up, and immediately

recognizes a gain. The company should use the fair value of the asset received
only if it is more clearly evident than the fair value of the asset given up.
To illustrate, Interstate Transportation Company exchanged a number of used
trucks plus cash for a semi-truck. The used trucks have a combined book value of
$42,000 (cost $64,000 less $22,000 accumulated depreciation). Interstate’s
purchasing agent, experienced in the secondhand market, indicates that the used
trucks have a fair value of $49,000. In addition to the trucks, Interstate must pay
$11,000 cash for the semi-truck. Interstate computes the cost of the semi-truck as
shown in Illustration 10.11.
Fair value of trucks exchanged €49,000
Cash paid
Cost of semi-truck
ILLUSTRATION 10.11 Computation of Semi-Truck Cost
Interstate records the exchange transaction as follows.
Trucks (semi)
Accumulated Depreciation—Trucks 22,000  
Trucks (used)
 
Gain on Disposal of Trucks
 
Cash
 
The gain is the difference between the fair value of the used trucks and their book
value. Illustration 10.12 presents the verification of the computation.
Fair value of used trucks
 
Cost of used trucks
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Less: Book value of used trucks  
Gain on disposal of used trucks  
ILLUSTRATION 10.12 Computation of Gain on Disposal of Used
Trucks
In this case, Interstate is in a different economic position, and therefore the
transaction has commercial substance. Thus, it recognizes a gain.
Lacks Commercial Substance
We now assume that the Interstate Transportation Company exchange lacks
commercial substance. That is, the economic position of Interstate did not change
significantly as a result of this exchange. In this case, Interstate defers the gain of

$7,000 and reduces the basis of the semi-truck. Illustration 10.13 shows two
different but acceptable computations to illustrate this reduction.
Fair value of semi-truck $60,000  
Book value of used trucks $42,000
Less: Gain deferred
7,000 OR Plus: Cash paid
Basis of semi-truck
Basis of semi-truck
ILLUSTRATION 10.13 Basis of Semi-Truck—Fair Value vs. Book Value
Interstate records this transaction as follows.
Trucks (semi)
Accumulated Depreciation—Trucks 22,000  
Trucks (used)
 
Cash
 
If the exchange lacks commercial substance, the company recognizes the gain
(reflected in the basis of the semi-truck) when it later sells the semi-truck, not at
the time of the exchange.
Illustration 10.14 presents in summary form the accounting requirements for
recognizing gains and losses on exchanges of non-monetary assets.
Compute the total gain or loss on the transaction. This amount is equal to the
difference between the fair value of the asset given up and the book value of the
asset given up.
ILLUSTRATION 10.14 Summary of Gain and Loss Recognition on
Exchanges of Non-Monetary Assets
Companies disclose in their financial statements non-monetary exchanges during a
period. Such disclosure indicates the nature of the transaction(s), the method of
accounting for the assets exchanged, and gains or losses recognized on the
exchanges.
Government Grants
Many companies receive government grants. Government grants are assistance
received from a government in the form of transfers of resources to a company in
return for past or future compliance with certain conditions relating to the
operating activities of the company.9 For example, AB InBev NV (BEL) received
government grants related to fiscal incentives given by certain Brazilian states,

based on the company’s operations and investments in these states. Danisco A/S
(DEN) notes that it receives government grants for such items as research,
development, and carbon-dioxide (CO2) allowances and investments.
In other words, a government grant is often some type of asset (such as cash;
securities; property, plant, and equipment; or use of facilities) provided as a
subsidy to a company. A government grant also occurs when debt is forgiven or
borrowings are provided to the company at a below-market interest rate. The major
accounting issues with government grants are to determine the proper method of
accounting for these transfers on the company’s books and how they should be
presented in the financial statements.
Accounting Approaches
When companies acquire an asset such as property, plant, and equipment through
a government grant, a strict cost concept dictates that the valuation of the asset
should be zero. However, a departure from the historical cost principle seems
justified because the only costs incurred (legal fees and other relatively minor
expenditures) are not a reasonable basis of accounting for the assets acquired. To
record nothing is to ignore the economic realities of an increase in wealth and
assets. Therefore, most companies use the fair value of the asset to establish its
value on the books.
What, then, is the proper accounting for the credit related to the government grant
when the fair value of the asset is used?10 Two approaches are suggested—the
capital (equity) approach and the income approach. Supporters of the equity
approach believe the credit should go directly to equity because often no repayment
of the grant is expected. In addition, these grants are an incentive by the
government—they are not earned as part of normal operations and should not
offset expenses of operations on the income statement.
Supporters of the income approach disagree—they believe that the credit should
be reported as revenue in the income statement. Government grants should not go
directly to equity because the government is not a shareholder. In addition, most
government grants have conditions attached to them which likely affect future
expenses. They should, therefore, be reported as grant revenue (or deferred grant
revenue) and matched with the associated expenses that will occur in the future as
a result of the grant.
IFRS requires the income approach. The general rule is that grants should be
recognized in income on a systematic basis that matches them with the related
costs that they are intended to compensate. [8] This is accomplished in one of two
ways for an asset such as property, plant, and equipment:
1. Recording the grant as deferred grant revenue, which is recognized as income
on a systematic basis over the useful life of the asset, or

2. Deducting the grant from the carrying amount of the assets received from the
grant, in which case the grant is recognized in income as a reduction of
depreciation expense.
To illustrate application of the income approach, consider the following three
examples.
Example 1: Grant for Lab Equipment
Spectrum AG received a €500,000 subsidy from the government to purchase lab
equipment on January 2, 2022. The lab equipment costs €2,000,000, has a useful
life of five years, and is depreciated on the straight-line basis. As indicated,
Spectrum can record this grant in one of two ways. (1) Credit Deferred Grant
Revenue for the subsidy and amortize the deferred grant revenue over the five-year
period. (2) Credit the lab equipment for the subsidy and depreciate this amount
over the five-year period.
If Spectrum chooses to record deferred revenue of €500,000, it amortizes this
amount over the five-year period to income (€100,000 per year). The effects on the
financial statements at December 31, 2022, are shown in Illustration 10.15.
Statement of Financial Position
Non-current assets
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Non-current liabilities
Deferred grant revenue
€
Current liabilities
Deferred grant revenue
Income Statement
Grant revenue for the year
€
Depreciation expense for the year
Net income (loss) effect
ILLUSTRATION 10.15 Government Grant Recorded as Deferred
Revenue
If Spectrum chooses to reduce the cost of the lab equipment, Spectrum reports the
equipment at €1,500,000 (€2,000,000 − €500,000) and depreciates this amount
over the five-year period. The effects on the financial statements at December 31,
2022, are shown in Illustration 10.16.

Statement of Financial Position
Non-current assets
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Income Statement
Depreciation expense for the year  
ILLUSTRATION 10.16 Government Grant Adjusted to Asset
The amount of net expense is the same for both situations (€300,000), but the
presentation on the financial statements is different.11
Example 2: Grant for Past Losses
Flyaway Airlines has incurred substantial operating losses over the last five years.
The company now has little liquidity remaining and is considering bankruptcy. The
City of Plentiville does not want to lose airline service and feels it has some
responsibility related to the airlines losses. It therefore agrees to provide a cash
grant of $1,000,000 to the airline to pay off its creditors so that it may continue
service. Because the grant is given to pay amounts owed to creditors for past losses,
Flyaway Airlines should record the income in the period it is received. The entry to
record this grant is as follows.
Cash
Grant Revenue  
If the conditions of the grant indicate that Flyaway must satisfy some future
obligations related to this grant, then it is appropriate to credit Deferred Grant
Revenue and amortize it over the appropriate periods in the future.
Example 3: Grant for Borrowing Costs
The City of Puerto Aloa is encouraging the high-tech firm TechSmart to move its
plant to Puerto Aloa. The city has agreed to provide an interest-free loan of
$10,000,000, with the loan payable at the end of 10 years, provided that TechSmart
will employ at least 50 percent of its workforce from the community of Puerto Aloa
over the next 10 years. TechSmart’s incremental borrowing rate is 9 percent.
Therefore, the present value of the future loan payable ($10,000,000) is
$6,499,300 ($10,000,000 × .64993i=9%, n=5). The entry to record the borrowing is as
follows.
Cash
Notes Payable  

In addition, using the deferred revenue approach, the company records the grant as
follows.
Cash
Deferred Grant Revenue  
TechSmart then uses the effective-interest rate to determine interest expense of
$584,937 (0.09 × $6,499,300) in the first year. The company also decreases
Deferred Grant Revenue and increases Grant Revenue for $584,937. As a result,
the net expense related to the borrowing is zero in each year.
Unfortunately, the accounting for government grants is still somewhat unsettled.
Companies are permitted to record grants at nominal values or at fair value. In
addition, they may record grants to property, plant, and equipment either as a
reduction of the asset or to deferred grant revenue. The key to these situations is to
provide disclosures that highlight the accounting approaches. Presented below are
examples of how grants are disclosed in the notes to the financial statements.
A company that adopted the deferred income approach is PetroChina Company
Limited (CHN), as shown in Illustration 10.17.

 PetroChina Company Limited
Note 4: Government grants
Government grants are non-reciprocal transfers of monetary or non-monetary
assets from the government to the Group except for capital contributions from the
government in the capacity as an investor in the Group.
A government grant is recognised when there is reasonable assurance that the
grant will be received and that the Group will comply with the conditions
attaching to the grant.
If a government grant is in the form of a transfer of a monetary asset, it is
measured at the amount received or receivable. If a government grant is in the
form of a transfer of a non-monetary asset, it is measured at fair value.
Government grants related to assets are grants whose primary condition is that
the Group qualifying for them should purchase, construct or otherwise acquire
long-term assets. Government grants related to income are grants other than
those related to assets. A government grant related to an asset is recognised
initially as deferred income and amortised to profit or loss in a reasonable and
systematic manner within the useful life of the relevant assets. A grant that
compensates the Group for expenses or losses to be incurred in the future is
recognised initially as deferred income, and recognised in profit or loss or released
to relevant cost in the period in which the expenses or losses are recognised. A
grant that compensates the Group for expenses or losses already incurred is
recognised to profit or loss or released to related cost immediately.
ILLUSTRATION 10.17 Deferred Income Disclosure
Daimler AG (DEU) is an example of a company adopting a policy of deducting
grants related to assets from the cost of the assets, as shown in Illustration

Daimler AG
Note 1: Government grants
Government grants related to assets are deducted from the carrying amount of the
asset and are recognized in earnings over the life of a depreciable asset as a
reduced depreciation expense. Government grants which compensate the Group
for expenses are recognized as other operating income in the same period as the
expenses themselves.
ILLUSTRATION 10.18 Reduction of Asset Disclosure
When a company contributes a non-monetary asset, it should record the amount
of the donation as an expense at the fair value of the donated asset. If a difference
exists between the fair value of the asset and its book value, the company should
recognize a gain or loss. To illustrate, Kline Industries donates land to the City of
São Paulo, Brazil for a city park. The land cost R$80,000 and has a fair value of
R$110,000. Kline Industries records this donation as follows.
Contribution Expense
Land
 
Gain on Disposal of Land  
The gain on disposal should be reported in the “Other income and expense” section
of the income statement, not as revenue.
Costs Subsequent to Acquisition
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Describe the accounting treatment for costs subsequent to acquisition.
After installing plant assets and readying them for use, a company incurs additional
costs that range from ordinary repairs to significant additions. The major problem
is allocating these costs to the proper time periods.
In determining how costs should be allocated subsequent to acquisition, companies
follow the same criteria used to determine the initial cost of property, plant, and
equipment. That is, they recognize costs subsequent to acquisition as an asset
when the costs can be measured reliably and it is probable that the company will
obtain future economic benefits (see Underlying Concepts). Evidence of future

economic benefit would include increases in (1) useful life, (2) quantity of product
produced, and (3) quality of product produced.
Underlying Concepts
Expensing long-lived wastebaskets is an application of the materiality concept.
Generally, companies incur four types of major expenditures relative to existing
assets.
Major Types of Expenditures
Additions. Increase or extension of existing assets.
Improvements and Replacements. Substitution of a better or similar asset
for an existing one.
Rearrangement and Reorganization. Movement of assets from one
location to another.
Repairs. Expenditures that maintain assets in condition for operation.
Additions
Additions should present no major accounting problems. By definition,
companies capitalize any addition to plant assets because a new asset is
created. For example, the addition of a wing to a hospital, or of an air conditioning
system to an office, increases the service potential of that facility. Companies
should capitalize such expenditures and record them in future periods when
revenues are recognized.
One problem that arises in this area is the accounting for any changes related to the
existing structure as a result of the addition. Is the cost incurred to tear down an
old wall, to make room for the addition, a cost of the addition or an expense or loss
of the period? The answer is that it depends on the original intent. If the company
had anticipated building an addition later, then this cost of removal is a proper cost
of the addition. But if the company had not anticipated this development, it should
properly report the removal as a loss in the current period on the basis of
inefficient planning. Conceptually, the company should remove the cost of the old
wall and related depreciation and record a loss. It should then add the cost of the
new wall to the cost of the building. In these situations, it is sometimes
impracticable to determine a reasonable carrying amount for the old wall.
Companies therefore assume the old asset to have a zero carrying amount and
simply add the cost of the replacement to the overall cost.
Improvements and Replacements

Companies substitute one asset for another through improvements and
replacements. What is the difference between an improvement and a
replacement? An improvement (betterment) is the substitution of a better
asset for the one currently used (say, a concrete floor for a wooden floor). A
replacement, on the other hand, is the substitution of a similar asset (a wooden
floor for a wooden floor).
Many times, improvements and replacements result from a general policy to
modernize or rehabilitate an older building or piece of equipment. The problem is
differentiating these types of expenditures from normal repairs. Does the
expenditure increase the future service potential of the asset? Or does it merely
maintain the existing level of service? Frequently, the answer is not clear-cut.
Good judgment is required to correctly classify these expenditures.
If the expenditure increases the future service potential of the asset, a company
should capitalize it. The company should simply remove the cost of the old asset
and related depreciation and recognize a loss, if any. It should then add the cost of
the new substituted asset.
To illustrate, Instinct Enterprises decides to replace the pipes in its plumbing
system. A plumber suggests that the company use plastic tubing in place of the cast
iron pipes and copper tubing. The old pipe and tubing have a book value of £15,000
(cost of £150,000 less accumulated depreciation of £135,000), and a residual value
of £1,000. The plastic tubing system costs £125,000. If Instinct pays £124,000 for
the new tubing after exchanging the old tubing, it makes the following entry.
Equipment (plumbing system)
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment 135,000  
Loss on Disposal of Equipment
Equipment (plumbing system)
 
Cash (£125,000 − £1,000)
 
One issue in any substitution is computing the cost and accumulated depreciation
of the old asset. Fortunately, IFRS requires each significant component of an asset
to be identified and its depreciation base to be determined and depreciated
separately. This approach is referred to as component depreciation accounting. To
illustrate, Hanoi Ltd. has a tractor that it purchased at a cost of £50,000. The
following chart lists the tractor’s individual components, and each component’s
useful life (all residual values are zero).
Cost
Useful Life Depreciation per Year
Tires
2 years
Transmission
5 years
Truck
10 years

Companies should keep accounting records based on the components of the asset.
If the company does not have this information, estimation methods generally can
provide a reasonable answer.
Rearrangement and Reorganization
As indicated earlier, a company may incur rearrangement or reorganization
costs for some of its assets. The question is whether the costs incurred in this
rearrangement or reorganization are capitalized or expensed. IFRS indicates that
the recognition of costs ceases once the asset is in the location and condition
necessary to begin operations as management intended. As a result, the costs of
reorganizing or rearranging existing property, plant, and equipment are not
capitalized but are expensed as incurred.
Repairs
Ordinary Repairs
A company makes ordinary repairs to maintain plant assets in operating
condition. It charges ordinary repairs to an expense account in the period incurred
on the basis that it is the primary period benefited. Maintenance charges that
occur regularly include replacing minor parts, lubricating and adjusting equipment,
repainting, and cleaning. A company treats these as ordinary operating expenses.
It is often difficult to distinguish a repair from an improvement or replacement.
The major consideration is whether the expenditure benefits more than one year or
one operating cycle, whichever is longer. If a major repair (such as an overhaul)
occurs, several periods will benefit. A company should generally handle this cost as
an improvement or replacement.
Major Repairs
Some companies, such as airlines Ryanair (IRL) and Lufthansa (DEU), or
shipping companies, such as A.P. Møller—Maersk (DEN) and CMA CGM
Group (FRA), have substantial overhaul costs related to their airplanes or ships.
For example, assume the Shipaway Company has just purchased a new ship for
$200 million. The useful life of the ship is 20 years, but every four years it must be
dry-docked and a major overhaul done. It is estimated that the overhaul will cost
$4 million. The $4 million should be accounted for as a separate component of the
cost of the ship (using component depreciation) and depreciated over four years. At
the time of the major overhaul, the cost and related depreciation to date should be
eliminated and replaced with the new cost incurred for the overhaul.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Disconnected
It all started with a check of the books by an internal auditor for WorldCom
Inc. (USA). The telecom giant’s newly installed chief executive had asked for a
financial review, and the auditor was spot-checking records of capital
expenditures. She found the company was using an unorthodox technique to
account for one of its biggest expenses: charges paid to local telephone
networks to complete long-distance calls.
Instead of recording these charges as operating expenses, WorldCom recorded
a significant portion as capital expenditures. The maneuver was worth
hundreds of millions of dollars to WorldCom’s bottom line. It effectively
turned a loss for all of one year and the first quarter of the next year into a
profit. The following illustration compares WorldCom’s accounting to that
under proper accounting principles. Soon after this discovery, WorldCom filed
for bankruptcy.
Source: Adapted from Jared Sandberg, Deborah Solomon, and Rebecca Blumenstein, “Inside
WorldCom’s Unearthing of a Vast Accounting Scandal,” Wall Street Journal (June 27, 2002), p. A1;
and C. Cooper, Extraordinary Circumstances: The Journey of a Corporate Whistle Blower (New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
Summary of Costs Subsequent to Acquisition
Illustration 10.19 summarizes the accounting treatment for various costs
incurred subsequent to the acquisition of capitalized assets.

Type of
Expenditure
Normal Accounting Treatment
Additions
Capitalize cost of addition to asset account.
Improvements
and
replacements
Remove cost of and accumulated depreciation on old asset,
recognizing any gain or loss. Capitalize cost of
improvement/replacement.
Rearrangement
and
reorganization
Expense costs of rearrangement and reorganization costs as
expense.
Repairs
asset, recognizing any gain or loss. Capitalize cost of major
repair.
ILLUSTRATION 10.19 Summary of Costs Subsequent to Acquisition of
Property, Plant, and Equipment
Disposition of Property, Plant, and Equipment
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Describe the accounting treatment for the disposal of property, plant, and
equipment.
A company, like Nokia (FIN), may retire plant assets voluntarily or dispose of
them by sale, exchange, involuntary conversion, or abandonment. Regardless of the
type of disposal, depreciation must be taken up to the date of disposition. Then,
Nokia should remove all accounts related to the retired asset. Generally, the book
value of the specific plant asset does not equal its disposal value. As a result, a gain
or loss develops. The reason: Depreciation is an estimate of cost allocation and not
a process of valuation. The gain or loss is really a correction of net income
for the years during which Nokia used the fixed asset.
Nokia should report gains or losses on the disposal of plant assets in the income
statement along with other items from customary business activities. However, if
Nokia sold, abandoned, spun off, or otherwise disposed of the “operations of a
component of a business,” then it should report the results separately in the
discontinued operations section of the income statement. As discussed in Chapter
4, Nokia should report any gain or loss from disposal of a business component with
the related results of discontinued operations.

Sale of Plant Assets
Companies record depreciation for the period of time between the date of the last
depreciation entry and the date of sale. To illustrate, assume that Barret Group
recorded depreciation on a machine costing €18,000 for nine years at the rate of
€1,200 per year. If it sells the machine in the middle of the tenth year for €7,000,
Barret records depreciation to the date of sale as:
Depreciation Expense (€1,200 × ½)
Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery  
The entry for the sale of the asset then is:
Cash
Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery [(€1,200 × 9) + €600] 11,400  
Machinery
 
Gain on Disposal of Machinery
 
The book value of the machinery at the time of the sale is €6,600 (€18,000 −
€11,400). Because the machinery sold for €7,000, the amount of the gain on the
sale is €400 (€7,000 − €6,600).
Involuntary Conversion
Sometimes, an asset’s service is terminated through some type of involuntary
conversion, such as fire, flood, theft, or condemnation. In some cases, companies
may recover all or some of the amount lost through insurance contracts or
payments from government agencies. The proper accounting for these events is
accomplished in two stages. First, the loss associated with the involuntary
conversion is recorded. Then, usually at a later date once the amount of the
recovery has been established, the company will record a gain or revenue from the
insurance proceeds or other recovery. The rationale for separating the two events is
that, in most cases, both the potential and the amount of the recovery are not
known at the time of the loss.12 To record this amount at that time would result in
a contingent asset, which is prohibited by IFRS. [9]
To illustrate, Camel Transport had a manufacturing plant located on company
property that stood directly in the path of a tornado. As a result of the tornado,
which occurred on May 16, 2022, the plant was completely destroyed. Camel was
eventually able to reach a settlement with its insurance company for the full fair
value of the plant. The settlement was reached on March 18, 2023. At the time of
the tornado, the building had a carrying value of $3,500,000 (original cost of
$6,000,000 less accumulated depreciation of $2,500,000). The amount of the
settlement with this insurance company was $5,000,000. Camel made the
following entries.

May 16, 2022
Loss from Tornado
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings
Buildings
 
March 18, 2023
Cash
Gain from Insurance Settlement
 
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
additions
average carrying amount
borrowing costs
capitalization period
capitalization rate
commercial substance
fixed assets
government grants
historical cost
improvements (betterments)
income approach
involuntary conversion
Land Improvements
lump-sum price
major repairs
non-monetary assets
ordinary repairs
plant assets
property, plant, and equipment
rearrangement costs
reorganization costs

replacements
self-constructed asset
Learning Objectives Review
1 Identify property, plant, and equipment and its related costs.
Property, plant, and equipment (1) are acquired for use in operations and not for
resale, (2) are long-term in nature and usually subject to depreciation, and (3)
possess physical substance. The costs included in initial valuation of property,
plant, and equipment are as follows.
Cost of land: Includes all expenditures made to acquire land and to ready it for use.
Land costs typically include (1) the purchase price; (2) closing costs, such as title to
the land, attorney’s fees, and recording fees; (3) costs incurred in getting the land
in condition for its intended use, such as grading, filling, draining, and clearing; (4)
assumption of any liens, mortgages, or encumbrances on the property; and (5) any
additional land improvements that have an indefinite life.
Cost of buildings: Includes all expenditures related directly to their acquisition or
construction. These costs include (1) materials, labor, and overhead costs incurred
during construction, and (2) professional fees and building permits.
Cost of equipment: Includes the purchase price, freight and handling charges
incurred, insurance on the equipment while in transit, cost of special foundations if
required, assembling and installation costs, and costs of conducting trial runs.
Self-constructed assets: Indirect costs of manufacturing create special problems
because companies cannot easily trace these costs directly to work and material
orders related to the constructed assets. Companies might handle these costs in
one of two ways: (1) assign no fixed overhead to the cost of the constructed asset,
or (2) assign a portion of all overhead to the construction process. Companies
should use the second method.
2 Discuss the accounting problems associated with the capitalization
of borrowing costs.
Only actual borrowing costs (with modifications) should be capitalized. The
rationale for this approach is that during construction, the asset is not generating
revenue and therefore companies should defer (capitalize) borrowing cost. Once
construction is completed, the asset is ready for its intended use and revenues can
be earned. Any borrowing cost incurred in purchasing an asset that is ready for its
intended use should be expensed.

3 Explain accounting issues related to acquiring and valuing plant
assets.
The following issues relate to acquiring and valuing plant assets. (1) Cash
discounts: Whether taken or not, they are generally considered a reduction in the
cost of the asset; the real cost of the asset is the cash or cash equivalent price of the
asset. (2) Deferred-payment contracts: Companies account for assets purchased on
long-term credit contracts at the present value of the consideration exchanged
between the contracting parties. (3) Lump-sum purchase: Allocate the total cost
among the various assets on the basis of their relative fair values. (4) Issuance of
shares: If the shares are actively traded, the market price of the shares issued is a
fair indication of the cost of the property acquired. If the market price of the
ordinary shares exchanged is not determinable, establish the fair value of the
property and use it as the basis for recording the asset and issuance of the ordinary
shares. (5) Exchanges of non-monetary assets. The accounting for exchanges of
non-monetary assets depends on whether the exchange has commercial substance.
See Illustrations 10.8 and 10.14 for summaries of how to account for exchanges. (6)
Grants: Record at the fair value of the asset received, and credit deferred revenue
or the appropriate asset in most cases.
4 Describe the accounting treatment for costs subsequent to
acquisition.
Illustration 10.19 summarizes how to account for costs subsequent to acquisition.
5 Describe the accounting treatment for the disposal of property,
plant, and equipment.
Regardless of the time of disposal, companies take depreciation up to the date of
disposition and then remove all accounts related to the retired asset. Gains or
losses on the retirement of plant assets are shown in the income statement along
with other items that arise from customary business activities. Gains or losses on
involuntary conversions are reported in “Other income and expense.”
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem

Columbia SA, which manufactures machine tools, had the following transactions
related to plant assets in 2022.
Asset A: On June 2, 2022, Columbia purchased a stamping machine at a retail
price of €12,000. Columbia paid 6% sales tax on this purchase. Columbia paid a
contractor €2,800 for a specially wired platform for the machine, to ensure non-
interrupted power to the machine. Columbia estimates the machine will have a
4-year useful life, with a residual value of €2,000 at the end of 4 years. The
machine was put into use on July 1, 2022.
Asset B: On January 1, 2022, Columbia signed a fixed-price contract for
construction of a warehouse facility at a cost of €1,000,000. It was estimated
that the project will be completed by December 31, 2022. On March 1, 2022, to
finance the construction cost, Columbia borrowed €1,000,000 payable April 1,
2023, plus interest at the rate of 10%. During 2022, Columbia made deposit and
progress payments totaling €750,000 under the contract. The excess borrowed
funds were invested in short-term securities, from which Columbia realized
investment revenue of €13,000. The warehouse was completed on December 31,
2022, at which time Columbia made the final payment to the contractor.
Columbia estimates the warehouse will have a 25-year useful life, with a residual
value of €20,000.
Columbia uses straight-line depreciation and employs the “half-year” convention
in accounting for partial-year depreciation. (Under this straight-line approach, a
half-year of depreciation is recorded in the first and last year of the asset’s useful
life.) Columbia’s fiscal year ends on December 31.
Instructions
a. At what amount should Columbia record the acquisition cost of the
machine?
b. What amount of borrowing cost should Columbia include in the cost of the
warehouse?
c. On July 1, 2024, Columbia decides to outsource its stamping operation to
Medek Group. As part of this plan, Columbia sells the machine (and the
platform) to Medek for €7,000. What is the impact of this disposal on
Columbia’s 2024 income before taxes?
Solution
a. Historical cost is measured by the cash or cash equivalent price of obtaining
the asset and bringing it to the location and condition for its intended use. For
Columbia, this is:

Price
Tax (€12,000 × .06)
Platform
Total
b. 
Interest expense on specific borrowings (€1,000,000 × .10 × 9/12) €75,000
Interest revenue from excess funds
Borrowing cost capitalized
c. The income effect is a gain or loss, determined by comparing the book value of
the asset to the disposal value:
Cost
Less: Accumulated depreciation (€1,690 + €3,380 + €1,690)
6,760*
Book value of machine and platform
Less: Cash received for machine and platform
Loss before income taxes
*Depreciable base: €15,520 − €2,000 = €13,520. Depreciation expense: €13,520 ÷ 4 = €3,380 per year.
2022: ½ year (€3,380 × .50) €1,690
2023: full year
2024: ½ year
Total
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics
Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are available for
practice in Wiley’s online courseware.
Questions
1. What are the major characteristics of plant assets?
2. Name the items, in addition to the amount paid to the former owner or
contractor, that may properly be included as part of the acquisition cost of the
following plant assets.
a. Land.
b. Machinery and equipment.
c. Buildings.

3. Indicate where the following items would be shown on a statement of financial
position.
a. A lien that was attached to the land when purchased.
b. Landscaping costs to ready land for use.
c. Attorney’s fees and recording fees related to purchasing land.
d. Variable overhead related to construction of machinery.
e. A parking lot servicing employees in the building.
f. Cost of temporary building for workers during construction of building.
g. Interest expense on bonds payable incurred during construction of a building.
h. Assessments for sidewalks that are maintained by the city.
i. The cost of demolishing an old building that was on the land when purchased.
4. Two positions have normally been taken with respect to the recording of fixed
manufacturing overhead as an element of the cost of plant assets constructed by a
company for its own use:
a. It should be excluded completely.
b. It should be included at the same rate as is charged to normal operations.
What are the circumstances or rationale that support or deny the application of
these methods?
5. The Buildings account of Postera SpA includes the following items that were
used in determining the basis for depreciating the cost of a building.
a. Promotion expenses.
b. Architect’s fees.
c. Interest during construction.
d. Interest revenue on investments held to fund construction of a building.
e. First-year operating losses related to the building.
Do you agree with these charges? If not, how would you deal with each of these
items in the company’s books and in its annual financial statements?
6. Cruz Company has purchased two tracts of land. One tract will be the site of its
new manufacturing plant, while the other is being purchased with the hope that it
will be sold in the next year at a profit. How should these two tracts of land be
reported in the statement of financial position?

7. One financial accounting issue encountered when a company constructs its own
plant is whether the borrowing cost to finance construction should be capitalized
and then amortized over the life of the assets constructed. What is the justification
for capitalizing such interest?
8. Provide examples of assets that do not qualify for capitalization of borrowing
costs.
9. What interest rates should be used in determining the amount of borrowing cost
to be capitalized? How should the amount of borrowing cost to be capitalized be
determined?
10. How should the amount of borrowing cost capitalized be disclosed in the notes
to the financial statements? How should interest revenue from temporarily
invested excess funds borrowed to finance the construction of assets be accounted
for?
11. Discuss the basic accounting problem that arises in handling each of the
following situations.
a. Assets purchased by issuance of ordinary shares.
b. Acquisition of plant assets by grant.
c. Purchase of a plant asset subject to a cash discount.
d. Assets purchased on a long-term credit basis.
e. A group of assets acquired for a lump sum.
f. An asset traded in or exchanged for another asset.
12. Magilke Industries acquired equipment this year to be used in its operations.
The equipment was delivered by the suppliers, installed by Magilke, and placed into
operation. Some of it was purchased for cash with discounts available for prompt
payment. Some of it was purchased under long-term payment plans for which the
interest charges approximated prevailing rates. What costs should Magilke
capitalize for the new equipment purchased this year? Explain.
13. Ocampo SA purchased for €2,200,000 property that included both land and a
building to be used in operations. The seller’s book value was €300,000 for the
land and €900,000 for the building. By appraisal, the fair value was estimated to be
€500,000 for the land and €2,000,000 for the building. At what amount should
Ocampo record the land and the building?
14. Pueblo Co. acquires machinery by paying $10,000 cash and signing a $5,000, 2-
year, zero-interest-bearing note payable. The note has a present value of $4,208,
and Pueblo purchased a similar machine last month for $13,500. At what cost
should the new equipment be recorded?

15. Stan Ott is evaluating two recent transactions involving exchanges of
equipment. In one case, the exchange has commercial substance. In the second
situation, the exchange lacks commercial substance. Explain to Stan the differences
in accounting for these two situations.
16. Crowe AG purchased a heavy-duty truck on July 1, 2019, for €30,000. It was
estimated that it would have a useful life of 10 years and then would have a
residual value of €6,000. The company uses the straight-line method of
depreciation. It was traded on August 1, 2023, for a similar truck costing €42,000;
€16,000 was allowed as trade-in value (also fair value) on the old truck and
€26,000 was paid in cash. A comparison of expected cash flows for the trucks
indicates the exchange has commercial substance. What is the entry to record the
exchange?
17. Ito Ltd. receives a local government grant to help defray the cost of its plant
facilities. The grant is provided to encourage Ito to move its operations to a certain
area. Explain how the grant might be reported.
18. Once equipment has been installed and placed in operation, subsequent
expenditures relating to this equipment are frequently thought of as repairs or
general maintenance and, hence, chargeable to operations in the period in which
the expenditure is made. Actually, determination of whether such an expenditure
should be charged to operations or capitalized involves a much more careful
analysis of the character of the expenditure. What are the factors that should be
considered in making such a decision?
19. What accounting treatment is normally given to the following items in
accounting for plant assets?
a. Additions.
b. Major repairs.
c. Improvements.
d. Replacements.
20. New machinery, which replaced a number of employees, was installed and put
in operation in the last month of the fiscal year. The employees had been dismissed
after payment of an extra month’s wages, and this amount was added to the cost of
the machinery. Discuss the propriety of the charge. If it was improper, describe the
proper treatment.
21. To what extent do you consider the following items to be proper costs of
property, plant, and equipment? Give reasons for your opinions.
a. Overhead of a business that builds its own equipment.
b. Cash discounts on purchases of equipment.

c. Borrowing costs during construction of a building.
d. Profit on self-construction.
e. Freight on equipment returned before installation, for replacement by other
equipment of greater capacity.
f. Cost of moving machinery to a new location.
g. Cost of plywood partitions erected as part of the remodeling of the office.
h. Replastering of a section of the building.
i. Cost of a new motor for one of the trucks.
22. Neville Enterprises has a number of fully depreciated assets that are still being
used in the main operations of the business. Because the assets are fully
depreciated, the president of the company decides not to show them on the
statement of financial position or disclose this information in the notes. Evaluate
this procedure.
23. What are the general rules for how gains or losses on disposal of plant assets
should be reported in income?
Brief Exercises