CHAPTER 4
Income Statement and Related Information
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
2. Describe the content and format of the income statement.
3. Discuss how to report various income items.
4. Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
5. Describe related equity statements.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 4
As the following opening story indicates, companies are attempting to provide income
statement information they believe is useful for decision-making. Investors need
complete and comparable information on income and its components to assess
company profitability correctly. In this chapter, we examine the many different types of
revenues, expenses, gains, and losses that affect the income statement and related
information, as follows.
Financial Statements Are Changing
RPC Group plc (GBR) reported the following additional information in its most recent
annual report (in £ millions).
Operating profit based on GAAP

Acquisition costs
Impairment losses
Restructuring costs
Net post-acquisition consideration and remuneration
Amortization of purchased intangible assets
Insurance proceeds and other
Adjusted operation profit
The company indicated that it presents the adjusted operating profit, which is called an
alternative performance measure, because it believes that this additional information, which
is beyond the scope of IFRS-mandated data to be reported, helps users to better understand
the company. For example, RPC Group management uses this measure in analyzing
performance, allocating resources, budgeting, and paying employee incentives. It further
notes that this measure, although defined by IFRS, may not be directly comparable with
other companies’ profit measures. Finally, the company states that it is not intended to be a
substitute for, or superior to, IFRS measurements of profit.
Why do companies make these additional adjustments? One major reason is that companies
believe the items on the income statement are not representative of operating results. Here
is another example using Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR). At one time, M&S
reported in a separate schedule adjustments to net income for items such as strategic
programme costs, restructuring costs, and impairment charges. All these adjustments made
the adjusted income measure higher than reported income.
Skeptics of these practices note that these adjustments generally lead to higher adjusted net
income. In addition, they note that it is difficult to compare these adjusted or pro forma
numbers because one company may have a different view of to what it believes to be
fundamental to the business. In many ways, the pro forma reporting practices by companies
such as RPC and M&S represent implied criticisms of certain financial reporting standards,
including how the information is presented on the income statement.
The IASB has initiated a project on financial statement presentation to address users’
concerns about these practices. Users believe there are too many alternatives for classifying
and reporting income statement information. For example, some companies disaggregate
product costs (such as materials and labor), as well as general and administrative costs
(such as rent and utilities) in their income statements. Other companies simply report
product costs and general and administrative costs in the aggregate, which makes it difficult
to understand the nature of these costs (recurring or non-recurring, fixed or variable). The
result is that two different companies can comply with existing standards for income
statement presentation but vary considerably in the detail provided.
What is needed is a common set of principles to be followed when income statement
information is presented. The IASB’s continuing work on financial statement presentation is
progressing, with an exposure draft expected soon. See the IFRS website for more
information on the status of the project. It is hoped that this project on financial statement
presentation will provide those necessary principles.

Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions,
are also available online.
Income Statement
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
The income statement is the report that measures the success of company operations for
a given period of time. (It is also often called the statement of income or statement of
earnings.1) The business and investment community uses the income statement to
determine profitability, investment value, and creditworthiness. It provides investors and
creditors with information that helps to predict the amounts, timing, and uncertainty
of future cash flows.
Usefulness of the Income Statement
The income statement helps users of financial statements predict future cash flows in a
number of ways. For example, investors and creditors use the income statement information
to:
1. Evaluate the past performance of the company. Examining revenues and
expenses indicates how the company performed and allows comparison to its
competitors. For example, analysts use the income data provided by Hyundai (KOR) to
compare its performance to that of Toyota (JPN).
2. Provide a basis for predicting future performance. Information about past
performance helps to determine important trends which, if they continue, provide
information about future performance. For example, General Electric (GE) (USA) at
one time reported consistent increases in revenues. Obviously, past success does not
necessarily translate into future success. However, analysts can better predict future

revenues, earnings, and cash flows if a reasonable correlation exists between past and
future performance.
3. Help assess the risk or uncertainty of achieving future cash flows. Information
on the various components of income—revenues, expenses, gains, and losses—
highlights the relationships among them. It also helps to assess the risk of not
achieving a particular level of cash flows in the future. For example, investors and
creditors often segregate Siemens AG’s (DEU) operating performance from
discontinued operations because Siemens primarily generates revenues and cash
through its operations. Thus, results from continuing operations have greater
significance for predicting future performance than do results from discontinued
operations.
In summary, information in the income statement—revenues, expenses, gains, and losses—
helps users evaluate past performance. It also provides insights into the likelihood of
achieving a particular level of cash flows in the future.
Limitations of the Income Statement
Because net income is an estimate and reflects a number of assumptions, income statement
users need to be aware of certain limitations associated with its information. Some of these
limitations include:

1. Companies omit items from the income statement that they cannot measure
reliably. Current practice prohibits recognition of certain items from the
determination of income even though the effects of these items can arguably affect the
company’s performance. For example, a company may not record in income unrealized
gains and losses on certain investment securities when there is uncertainty that it will
ever realize the changes in value. In addition, an increasing number of companies, such
as L’Oréal (FRA) and Daimler AG (DEU), experience increases in value due to brand
recognition, customer service, and product quality. A common framework for
identifying and reporting these types of values is still lacking.
2. Income numbers are affected by the accounting methods employed. One
company may depreciate its plant assets on an accelerated basis; another chooses
straight-line depreciation. Assuming all other factors are equal, the first company will
report lower income. In effect, we are comparing apples to oranges.
3. Income measurement involves judgment. For example, one company in good faith
may estimate the useful life of an asset to be 20 years while another company uses a 15-
year estimate for the same type of asset. Similarly, some companies may make
optimistic estimates of future warranty costs and bad debt expenses, which result in
lower expense and higher income.

In summary, several limitations of the income statement reduce the usefulness of its
information for predicting the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows.
Quality of Earnings
Our discussion so far has highlighted the importance of information in the income
statement for investment and credit decisions, including the evaluation of the company and
its managers.2 Companies try to meet or beat market expectations so that the market price
of their shares and the value of management’s compensation increase. As a result,
companies have incentives to manage income to meet earnings targets or to make earnings
look less risky.
Regulators have expressed concern that the motivations to meet earnings targets may
override good business practices. This erodes the quality of earnings and the quality of
financial reporting. As a former regulator noted, “Managing may be giving way to
manipulation; integrity may be losing out to illusion.”3
What is earnings management? It is often defined as the planned timing of revenues,
expenses, gains, and losses to smooth out bumps in earnings. In most cases, companies use
earnings management to increase income in the current year at the expense of income in
future years. For example, they prematurely recognize sales in order to boost earnings. As
one commentator noted, “… it’s like popping a cork in [opening] a bottle of wine before it is
ready.”
Companies also use earnings management to decrease current earnings in order to increase
income in the future. The classic case is the use of “cookie jar” reserves. Companies
establish these reserves by using unrealistic assumptions to estimate liabilities for such
items as environmental liabilities, restructuring charges, and warranty returns. The
companies then reduce these reserves to increase reported income in the future.
Such earnings management negatively affects the quality of earnings if it distorts the
information in a way that is less useful for predicting future earnings and cash flows.
Markets rely on trust. The bond between shareholders and the company must remain
strong. Investors or others losing faith in the numbers reported in the financial statements
will damage capital markets.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Four: The Loneliest Number
Managing earnings up or down adversely affects the quality of earnings. Why do
companies engage in such practices? Research concludes that many companies tweak
quarterly earnings to meet investor expectations. How do they do it? Research findings
indicate that companies tend to nudge their earnings numbers up by a 10th of a cent or
two. That lets them round results up to the highest cent, as illustrated in the following
chart.
What the research shows is that the number “4” appeared less often in the 10th’s place
than any other digit and significantly less often than would be expected by chance. This
effect is called “quadrophobia.” For the typical company in the study, an increase of
$31,000 in quarterly net income would boost earnings per share by a 10th of a cent. A
more recent analysis of quarterly results for more than 2,600 companies found that
rounding up remains more common than rounding down.
Another recent study reinforces the concerns about earnings management. Based on a
survey of 169 public-company chief financial officers (and with in-depth interviews of
12), the study concludes that high-quality earnings are sustainable when backed by
actual cash flows and when they avoid “unreliable long-term estimates.” However,
about 20 percent of firms manage earnings to misrepresent their economic
performance. And when they do manage earnings, it could move EPS by an average of
10 percent.
Is such earnings management a problem for investors? It is if they cannot determine
the impact on earnings quality. Indeed, the surveyed CFOs “believe that it is difficult for
outside observers to unravel earnings management, especially when such earnings are
managed using subtle unobservable choices or real actions.” What’s an investor to do?
The survey authors say the CFOs “advocate paying close attention to the key managers

running the firm, the lack of correlation between earnings and cash flows, significant
deviations between firm and peer experience, and unusual behavior in accruals.”
Sources: S. Thurm, “For Some Firms, a Case of ‘Quadrophobia’,” Wall Street Journal (February 14, 2010); and
H. Greenberg, “CFOs Concede Earnings Are ‘Managed’,” www.cnbc.com (July 19, 2012). The study referred to is by
I. Dichev, J. Graham, C. Harvey, and S. Rajgopal, “Earnings Quality: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics (2013), pp. 1–33.
Content and Format of the Income Statement
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Describe the content and format of the income statement.
Elements of the Income Statement
Net income results from revenue, expense, gain, and loss transactions. The income
statement summarizes these transactions. This method of income measurement, the
transaction approach, focuses on the income-related activities that have occurred during
the period.4 The statement can further classify income by customer, product line, or
function; by operating and non-operating; and by continuing and discontinued. The two
major elements of the income statement are as follows.
Elements of Financial Statements
Income. Income is increases in assets, or decreases in liabilities, that result in
increases in equity, other than those relating to contributions from holders of equity
claims.
Expenses. Expenses are decreases in assets, or increases in liabilities, that result in
decreases in equity, other than those relating to distributions to holders of equity
claims. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References Section near the end of the
chapter.)
The definition of income includes both revenues and gains. Revenues arise from the
ordinary activities of a company and take many forms, such as sales, fees, interest,
dividends, and rents. Gains represent other items that meet the definition of income and
may or may not arise in the ordinary activities of a company. Gains include, for example,
gains on the sale of long-term assets or unrealized gains on trading securities.
The definition of expenses includes both expenses and losses. Expenses generally arise from
the ordinary activities of a company and take many forms, such as cost of goods sold,
depreciation, rent, salaries and wages, and taxes. Losses represent other items that meet the
definition of expenses and may or may not arise in the ordinary activities of a company.
Losses include losses on restructuring charges, losses related to sale of long-term assets, or
unrealized losses on trading securities.5
When gains and losses are reported on an income statement, they are generally separately
disclosed because knowledge of them is useful for assessing future cash flows. For example,

when Goody’s Burger House (GRC) sells a hamburger, it records the selling price as
revenue. However, when Goody’s Burger House sells land, it records any excess of the
selling price over the book value as a gain. This difference in treatment results because the
sale of the hamburger is part of Goody’s Burger House’s regular operations. The sale of land
is not.
We cannot overemphasize the importance of reporting these elements. Most decision-
makers find the parts of a financial statement to be more useful than the whole. As we
indicated earlier, investors and creditors are interested in predicting the amounts, timing,
and uncertainty of future income and cash flows. Having income statement elements shown
in some detail and in comparison with prior years’ data allows decision-makers to better
assess future income and cash flows.6
Intermediate Components of the Income Statement
Companies generally present some or all of the following sections and totals within the
income statement, as shown in Illustration 4.1. [2]

1.
Sales or Revenue Section. Presents sales, discounts, allowances, returns, and other
related information. Its purpose is to arrive at the net amount of sales revenue.
2.
Cost of Goods Sold Section. Shows the cost of goods sold to produce the sales.
 
Gross Profit. Revenue less cost of goods sold.
3.
Selling Expenses. Reports expenses resulting from the company’s efforts to make
sales.
4.
Administrative or General Expenses. Reports expenses of general administration.
5.
Other Income and Expense. Includes most other transactions that do not fit into
the revenues and expenses categories provided above. Items such as gains and losses
on sales of long-lived assets, impairments of assets, and restructuring charges are
reported in this section. In addition, revenues such as rent revenue, dividend revenue,
and interest revenue are often reported.
 
Income from Operations. Company’s results from normal operations.
6.
Financing Costs. A separate item that identifies the financing cost of the company,
hereafter referred to as interest expense.
 
Income before Income Tax. The total income before income tax.
7.
Income Tax. A short section reporting taxes levied on income before income tax.
 
Income from Continuing Operations. A company’s results before any gain or loss
on discontinued operations. If the company does not have any gain or loss on
discontinued operations, this section is not reported and this amount is reported as net
income.
8.
Discontinued Operations. Gains or losses resulting from the disposition of a
component of a company.
 
Net Income. The net results of the company’s performance over a period of time.
9.
Non-Controlling Interest. Presents an allocation of net income to the controlling
shareholders and to the non-controlling interest.
10. Earnings per Share. Per share amounts that are reported.
ILLUSTRATION 4.1 Income Statement Format
Illustration 4.2 presents an income statement for Boc Hong Company. Boc Hong’s income
statement includes all of the major items in the list above, except for discontinued
operations. In arriving at net income, the statement presents the following subtotals and
totals: gross profit, income from operations, income before income tax, and net income.

Boc Hong Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales
 
 
 
Sales revenue
 
 
Less: Sales discounts
 
Sales returns and allowances
 
Net sales
 
 
Cost of goods sold
 
 
Gross profit
 
 
Selling expenses
 
 
 
Sales salaries and commissions
 
Sales office salaries
 
Travel and entertainment
 
Advertising expense
 
Delivery expense
 
Shipping supplies and expense
 
Postage and stationery
 
Telephone and Internet expense
 
Depreciation of sales equipment
Administrative expenses
 
 
 
Officers’ salaries
 
Office salaries
 
Legal and professional services
 
Utilities expense
 
Insurance expense
 
Depreciation of building
 
Depreciation of office equipment
 
Stationery, supplies, and postage
 
Miscellaneous office expenses
Other income and expense
 
 
 
Dividend revenue
 
Rent revenue
 
Gain on sale of plant assets
 
Income from operations
 
 
Interest on bonds and notes
 
 
Income before income tax
 
 
Income tax
 
 

Net income for the year
 
 
Attributable to:
 
 
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong
 
 
Non-controlling interest
 
 
Earnings per share
 
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.2 Income Statement
Condensed Income Statements
In some cases, an income statement cannot possibly present all the desired expense detail.
To solve this problem, a company includes only the totals of components in the statement of
income. It then also prepares supplementary schedules to support the totals. This format
may reduce the income statement itself to a few lines on a single sheet. For this reason,
readers who wish to study all the reported data on operations must give their attention to
the supporting schedules.
For example, consider the income statement shown in Illustration 4.3 for Boc Hong
Company. This statement is a condensed version of the more detailed income statement
presented in Illustration 4.2. It is more representative of the type found in practice.
Illustration 4.4 shows an example of a supporting schedule, cross-referenced as Note D
and detailing the selling expenses.
Boc Hong Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net sales
 
Cost of goods sold
 
Gross profit
 
Selling expenses (see Note D) $453,028  
Administrative expenses
Other income and expense
 
Income from operations
 
Interest expense
 
Income before income tax
 
Income tax
 
Net income for the year
 
Attributable to:
 
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong
 
Non-controlling interest
 
Earnings per share
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.3 Condensed Income Statement

Note D: Selling expenses
 
Sales salaries and commissions
Sales office salaries
Travel and entertainment
Advertising expense
Delivery expense
Shipping supplies and expense
Postage and stationery
Telephone and Internet expense
Depreciation of sales equipment
Total selling expenses
ILLUSTRATION 4.4 Sample Supporting Schedule
How much detail should a company include in the income statement? On the one hand, a
company wants to present a simple, summarized statement so that readers can readily
discover important factors. On the other hand, it wants to disclose the results of all activities
and to provide more than just a skeleton report. As a result, the income statement always
includes certain basic elements, but companies can present them in various formats.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
You May Need a Map
Many companies (like RPC Group in the opening story) promote their performance
through the reporting of various “alternative” performance measures. The basic
approach is to adjust a number such as operating income by adding back both non-
recurring expenses and losses, and also expenses that are recurring but are not viewed
by management as useful in understanding the performance of the business. This
commonly results in a performance measure that is substantially better than the
traditional IFRS-based measures. This difference led one accounting regulator to quip
that these alternative measures should be called EBS—“Everything but Bad Stuff.”
According to the IASB, “there has been an increasing trend for companies to emphasise
‘adjusted’ earnings—known as non-IFRS earnings—which can paint a misleading
picture of their true financial situations.” Indeed, U.S. public companies are required to
reconcile non-U.S. GAAP financial measures to U.S. GAAP, thereby giving investors a
roadmap to analyze the adjustments companies make to their U.S. GAAP numbers to
arrive at pro forma results.
Recently, WeWork (USA) came under intense scrutiny as it prepared for its initial
public offering. The shared work space provider has for a number of years reported
significant losses using U.S. GAAP measures. But its own alternative performance
measure, called “community adjusted EBITDA,” has shown a different outcome. For
example in a recent year when the company reported a $931 million operating loss, it
also reported that community adjusted EBITDA for the same period showed a profit of
$231 million. Quite a difference!
In order to assist users of financial statements, companies that include these alternative
performance measures have begun to publish notes and even full guides to explain the
measures and how they are computed. For example, Vodafone Group plc (GBR)
included a significant number of pages in its most recent annual report to provide an
explanation for its alternative performance measures reported. Similarly, Nestlé (CHE)
now publishes annually a separate alternative performance measures guide to explain
the 14 different alternative performance measures the company uses.
Finding the right balance between allowing a company to tell its own story, including
both IFRS-based performance measures and alternative measures that the company has
created, has drawn significant attention from regulators around the world. The U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) only allows companies to, in essence,
report the alternative measures less prominently than the U.S. GAAP measures.
Furthermore, the alternative measures must be reconciled to U.S. GAAP measures. The
U.K. Financial Reporting Council has also examined alternative performance measures
reported by companies under its authority. It reported 10 different concerns, including
that many alternative performance measures were given greater prominence in the
financial reports and that many lacked explanation about why items had been excluded
from adjusted profit measures.
Sources: L. Turner, “Remarks to the 39th Annual Corporate Counsel Institute,” U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (October 12, 2000); H. Hoogervorst, “Performance Reporting and the Pitfalls of Non-GAAP Metrics,”
speech given at the Annual Conference of the European Accounting Association (May 11, 2016). See also SEC
Regulation G, “Conditions for Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures,” Release No. 33–8176 (March 28, 2003);

and “Corporate Reporting Thematic Review: Alternative Performance Measures,” Financial Reporting Council
(November 2017).
Reporting Various Income Items
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Discuss how to report various income items.
Gross Profit
Boc Hong Company’s gross profit is computed by deducting cost of goods sold from net
sales. The disclosure of net sales is useful because Boc Hong reports regular sales revenue as
a separate item. It discloses unusual or incidental revenues in other income and expense. As
a result, analysts can more easily understand and assess trends in revenue from continuing
operations.
Similarly, the reporting of gross profit provides a useful number for evaluating performance
and predicting future earnings. Statement readers may study the trend in gross profits to
understand how competitive pressure affected profit margins.
Income from Operations
Boc Hong Company determines income from operations by deducting selling and
administrative expense as well as other income and expense from gross profit. Income from
operations highlights items that affect regular business activities. As such, it is a metric
often used by analysts in helping to predict the amount, timing, and uncertainty of future
cash flows.
Expense Classification
Companies are required to present an analysis of expenses classified either by their nature
(such as cost of materials used, direct labor incurred, delivery expense, advertising expense,
employee benefits, depreciation expense, and amortization expense) or their function (such
as cost of goods sold, selling expenses, and administrative expenses).
An advantage of the nature-of-expense method is that it is simple to apply because
allocations of expense to different functions are not necessary. For manufacturing
companies that must allocate costs to the product produced, using a nature-of-expense
approach permits companies to report expenses without making arbitrary allocations.
The function-of-expense method, however, is often viewed as more relevant because
this method identifies the major cost drivers of the company and therefore helps users
assess whether these amounts are appropriate for the revenue generated. As indicated, a
disadvantage of this method is that the allocation of costs to the varying functions may be
arbitrary and therefore the expense classification becomes misleading.
To illustrate these two methods, assume that the accounting firm of Telaris Group performs
audit, tax, and consulting services. It has the following revenues and expenses.
Service revenues

Cost of services
 
Staff salaries (related to various services performed)
Supplies expense (related to various services performed)
Selling expenses
 
Advertising costs
Entertainment expense
Administrative expenses
 
Utilities expense
Depreciation on building
If Telaris Group uses the nature-of-expense approach, its income statement presents each
expense item but does not classify the expenses into various subtotals. This approach is
shown in Illustration 4.5.
Telaris Group
Income Statement
For the Month of January 2022
Service revenues
Staff salaries
Supplies expense
Advertising costs
Utilities expense
Depreciation on building
Entertainment expense
Net income
ILLUSTRATION 4.5 Nature-of-Expense Approach
If Telaris uses the function-of-expense approach, its income statement is presented as
shown in Illustration 4.6.
Telaris Group
Income Statement
For the Month of January 2022
Service revenues
Cost of services
Selling expenses
Administrative expenses
Net income
ILLUSTRATION 4.6 Function-of-Expense Approach
The function-of-expense method is generally used in practice, although many companies
believe both approaches have merit. These companies use the function-of-expense approach

on the income statement but provide detail of the expenses (as in the nature-of-expense
approach) in the notes to the financial statements. For example, Boc Hong’s condensed
income statement, shown in Illustrations 4.3 and 4.4, indicates how this information might
be reported.7 For homework purposes, use the function-of-expense approach shown in the
Boc Hong example in Illustration 4.3, unless directed otherwise.
Gains and Losses
What should be included in net income is controversial. For example, should companies
report gains and losses, and corrections of revenues and expenses of prior years, as part of
retained earnings? Or, should companies first present them in the income statement and
then carry them to retained earnings?
This issue is extremely important because the number and magnitude of these items are
substantial. For example, Illustration 4.7 identifies the most common types and number
of gains and losses reported in a survey of 500 large companies. Notice that more than 40
percent of the surveyed firms reported restructuring charges, which often contain write-offs
and other one-time items. A survey of 200 IFRS adopters indicates that about 27 percent of
the surveyed firms reported a discontinued operation charge.8
ILLUSTRATION 4.7 Number of Unusual Items Reported in a Recent Year by
500 Large Companies
As our opening story discusses, we need consistent and comparable income reporting
practices to avoid “promotional” information reported by companies. Developing a
framework for reporting these gains and losses is important to ensure reliable income
information.9 Some users argue that the most useful income measure reflects only regular
and recurring revenue and expense elements. Unusual, non-recurring items do not reflect a
company’s future earning power.
In contrast, others warn that a focus on income that excludes these items potentially misses
important information about a company’s performance. Any gain or loss experienced by the
company, whether directly or indirectly related to operations, contributes to its long-run
profitability. As one analyst notes, “write-offs matter.… They speak to the volatility of past
earnings.”10
In general, the IASB takes the position that both revenues and expenses and
other income and expense should be reported as part of income from

operations. For example, it would be inappropriate to exclude items clearly related to
operations (such as inventory write-downs and restructuring and relocation expenses)
because they occur irregularly or infrequently, or are unusual in amount. Similarly, it would
be inappropriate to exclude items on the grounds that they do not involve cash flows, such
as depreciation and amortization expenses. However, companies can provide
additional line items, headings, and subtotals when such presentation is
relevant to an understanding of the entity’s financial performance.
IFRS indicates additional items that may need disclosure on the income statement to help
users predict the amount, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. Examples of these
unusual items are as follows.
Losses on write-downs of inventories to net realizable value or of property, plant, and
equipment to recoverable amount, as well as reversals of such write-downs.
Losses on restructurings of the activities of a company and reversals of any provisions
for the costs of restructuring.
Gains or losses on the disposal of items of property, plant, and equipment, or
investments.
Litigation settlements.
Other reversals of liabilities.
Most companies therefore report these items as part of operations and disclose them in
great detail if material in amount. Some, for example, simply show each item as a separate
item on the income statement before income from operations. Other companies use the
caption Other income and expense and then itemize them in this section or in the notes
to the financial statements. For homework purposes, itemize gains, losses, revenues, and
expenses that are not reported as part of the revenue and expense sections of the income
statement in the “Other income and expense” section.
Income Before Income Tax
Boc Hong computes income before income tax by deducting interest expense (often referred
to as financing costs) from income from operations. Under IFRS, companies must report
their financing costs on the income statement. The reason for this requirement is to
differentiate between a company’s business activities (how it uses capital to create value)
and its financing activities (how it obtains capital).
In most cases, the financing costs involve interest expense. In other situations, companies
offset items, such as interest expense, against interest revenue. Illustration 4.8 indicates
how Network Rail (GBR) presents its financing costs involving only interest expense.
As indicated, some companies offset interest revenue and interest expense, and identify it as
either finance costs or interest expense and interest revenue, net. For homework purposes,
consider only interest expense as financing costs. Interest revenue (income) should be
reported as part of “Other income and expense.”

Network Rail
On its income statement:
(in millions)
Finance costs
Note 9
Note 9 Finance costs
Interest on bank loans and overdrafts
£
Interest on loan issued by Department of Transport
Interest on bonds issued under the Debt Issuance Programme
Interest on derivative instruments
Defined benefit pension interest cost
Debt Issuance Programme financial indemnity fee
Other interest
Total borrowing costs
Less: capitalised interest
Total finance costs
Borrowing costs are included in the costs of qualifying assets to the extent that the asset is
financed by the group. The average rate used during the year was 3.7 per cent.
ILLUSTRATION 4.8 Presentation of Finance Costs
Net Income
Boc Hong deducts income tax from income before income tax to arrive at net income. Net
income represents the income after all revenues and expenses for the period are considered.
It is viewed by many as the most important measure of a company’s success or failure for a
given period of time.
Income tax is reported on the income statement right before net income because this
expense cannot be computed until all revenues and expenses are determined. In practice, an
understanding of how the company arrived at the income tax for the period is important. For
example, some of the revenue items may have different tax rates associated with them. In
other cases, expense items may not be deductible for income tax purposes. Understanding
these situations enables users to better predict what the future holds for the company. As a
result, there is often extensive disclosure related to how the number for income tax expense
is determined. Chapter 19 discusses this subject in detail.
Earnings per Share
A company customarily sums up the results of its operations in one important figure: net
income. However, the financial world has widely accepted an even more distilled figure as
the most significant business indicator—earnings per share (EPS).

The computation of earnings per share is usually straightforward. Earnings per share is
net income minus preference dividends (income available to ordinary
shareholders), divided by the weighted average of ordinary shares outstanding.11
To illustrate, assume that Lancer, Inc. reports net income of $350,000. It declares and pays
preference dividends of $50,000 for the year. The weighted-average number of ordinary
shares outstanding during the year is 100,000 shares. Lancer computes earnings per share
of $3, as shown in Illustration 4.9.
= Earnings per Share
= $3
ILLUSTRATION 4.9 Equation Illustrating Computation of Earnings per Share
Note that EPS measures the number of dollars earned by each ordinary share. It does not
represent the dollar amount paid to shareholders in the form of dividends.
Prospectuses, proxy material, and annual reports to shareholders commonly use the “net
income per share” or “earnings per share” ratio. The financial press and securities analysts
also highlight EPS. Because of its importance, companies must disclose earnings per
share on the face of the income statement.
Many companies have simple capital structures that include only ordinary shares. For these
companies, a presentation such as “Earnings per share” is appropriate on the income
statement. In many instances, however, companies’ earnings per share are subject to
dilution (reduction) in the future because existing contingencies permit the issuance of
additional shares.12[3]
In summary, the simplicity and availability of EPS figures lead to their widespread use.
Because of the importance that the public, even the well-informed public, attaches to
earnings per share, companies must make the EPS figure as meaningful as possible.
Discontinued Operations
As discussed previously, one of the most common types of unusual items is discontinued
operations. The IASB defines a discontinued operation as a component of an entity that
either has been disposed of, or is classified as held-for-sale, and:
1. Represents a major line of business or geographical area of operations, or
2. Is part of a single, coordinated plan to dispose of a major line of business or
geographical area of operations, or
3. Is a subsidiary acquired exclusively with a view to resell. [4]
To illustrate a component, Unilever plc (GBR) manufactures and sells consumer
products. It has several product groups, each with different product lines and brands. For
Unilever, a product group is the lowest level at which it can clearly distinguish the
operations and cash flows from the rest of the company’s operations. Therefore, each
Net Income  − Preference Dividends
Weighted Average of Ordinary Shares Outstanding
$350,000 −$50,000

product group is a component of the company. If a component were disposed of, Unilever
would classify it as a discontinued operation.
Here is another example. Assume that Softso Inc. has experienced losses with certain brands
in its beauty-care products group. As a result, Softso decides to sell that part of its business.
It will discontinue any continuing involvement in the product group after the sale. In this
case, Softso eliminates the operations and the cash flows of the product group from its
ongoing operations, and reports it as a discontinued operation.
On the other hand, assume Softso decides to remain in the beauty-care business but will
discontinue the brands that experienced losses. Because Softso cannot differentiate the cash
flows from the brands from the cash flows of the product group as a whole, it cannot
consider the brands a component. Softso does not classify any gain or loss on the sale of the
brands as a discontinued operation.
Companies report as discontinued operations (in a separate income statement category) the
gain or loss from disposal of a component of a business. In addition, companies report
the results of operations of a component that has been or will be disposed of
separately from continuing operations. Companies show the effects of discontinued
operations net of tax as a separate category, after continuing operations.
To illustrate, Multiplex Products, a highly diversified company, decides to discontinue its
electronics division. During the current year, the electronics division lost £300,000 (net of
tax). Multiplex sold the division at the end of the year at a loss of £500,000 (net of tax).
Illustration 4.10 shows the reporting of discontinued operations for Multiplex.
Income from continuing operations
 
Discontinued operations
 
 
Loss from operation of discontinued electronics division (net of
tax)
 
Loss from disposal of electronics division (net of tax)
Net income
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.10 Income Statement Presentation of Discontinued
Operations
Companies use the phrase “Income from continuing operations” only when gains or
losses on discontinued operations occur.13
A company that reports a discontinued operation must report per share amounts for the line
item either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to the financial statements.
[5] To illustrate, consider the income statement for Poquito Industries SA, shown in
Illustration 4.11. Notice the order in which Poquito shows the data, with per share
information at the bottom. Assume that the company had 100,000 shares outstanding for
the entire year. The Poquito income statement, as Illustration 4.11 shows, is highly
condensed. Poquito would need to describe items such as “Other income and expense” and
“Discontinued operations” fully and appropriately in the statement or related notes.

Poquito Industries SA
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
 
Cost of goods sold
 
Gross profit
 
Selling and administrative expenses
 
Other income and expense
 
 
Interest revenue
Loss on disposal of part of Textile Division
Loss on sale of investments
Income from operations
 
Interest expense
 
Income before income tax
 
Income tax
 
Income from continuing operations
 
Discontinued operations
 
 
Income from operations of Pizza Division, less applicable
income tax of R$24,800
 
Loss on disposal of Pizza Division, less applicable income tax
savings of R$41,000
Net income
 
Per share
 
 
Income from continuing operations
 
Income from operations of discontinued division, net of tax
 
Loss on disposal of discontinued operation, net of tax
 
Net income
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.11 Income Statement
Intraperiod Tax Allocation
Companies report discontinued operations on the income statement net of tax. The
allocation of tax to this item is called intraperiod tax allocation, that is, allocation within
a period. It relates the income tax expense (sometimes referred to as the income tax
provision) of the fiscal period to the specific items that give rise to the amount of the
income tax provision.
Intraperiod tax allocation helps financial statement users better understand the impact of
income taxes on the various components of net income. For example, readers of financial
statements will understand how much income tax expense relates to “income from
continuing operations.” This approach should help users to better predict the amount,
timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. In addition, intraperiod tax allocation

discourages statement readers from using pretax measures of performance when evaluating
financial results, and thereby recognizes that income tax expense is a real cost.
Companies use intraperiod tax allocation on the income statement for the following items:
(1) income from continuing operations and (2) discontinued operations. The general concept
is “let the tax follow the income.”
To compute the income tax expense attributable to “Income from continuing operations,” a
company would find the income tax expense related to both the revenue and expense
transactions as well as other income and expense used in determining this income subtotal.
(In this computation, the company does not consider the tax consequences of items
excluded from the determination of “Income from continuing operations.”) Companies then
associate a separate tax effect (e.g., for discontinued operations). Here, we look in more
detail at calculation of intraperiod tax allocation for discontinued gain or discontinued loss.
Discontinued Operations (Gain)
In applying the concept of intraperiod tax allocation, assume that Schindler AG has income
before income tax of €250,000. It has a gain of €100,000 from a discontinued operation.
Assuming a 30 percent income tax rate, Schindler presents the information on the income
statement, as shown in Illustration 4.12.
Income before income tax
 
Income tax
 
Income from continuing operations  
Gain on discontinued operations
Less: Applicable income tax
Net income
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.12 Intraperiod Tax Allocation, Discontinued Operations
Gain
Schindler determines the income tax of €75,000 (€250,000 × 30%) attributable to “Income
before income tax” from revenue and expense transactions related to this income. Schindler
omits the tax consequences of items excluded from the determination of “Income before
income tax.” The company shows a separate tax effect of €30,000 related to the “Gain on
discontinued operations.”
Discontinued Operations (Loss)
To illustrate the reporting of a loss from discontinued operations, assume that Schindler AG
has income before income tax of €250,000. It suffers a loss from discontinued operations of
€100,000. Assuming a 30 percent tax rate, Schindler presents the income tax on the income
statement as shown in Illustration 4.13. In this case, the loss provides a positive tax
benefit of €30,000. Schindler, therefore, subtracts it from the €100,000 loss.

Income before income tax
 
Income tax
 
Income from continuing operations
 
Loss from discontinued operations
Less: Applicable income tax reduction
Net income
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.13 Intraperiod Tax Allocation, Discontinued Operations
Loss
Companies may also report the tax effect of a discontinued item by means of a note
disclosure, as Illustration 4.14 shows.
Income before income tax
Income tax
Income from continuing operations
Loss on discontinued operations, less applicable income tax reduction (Note 1)
Net income
Note 1: During the year the Company suffered a loss on discontinuing operations of
€70,000, net of applicable income tax reduction of €30,000.
ILLUSTRATION 4.14 Note Disclosure of Intraperiod Tax Allocation
Allocation to Non-Controlling Interest
A company like Siemens (DEU) owns substantial interests in other companies. Siemens
generally consolidates the financial results of these companies into its own financial
statements. In these cases, Siemens is referred to as the parent, and the other companies are
referred to as subsidiaries. Non-controlling interest is then the portion of equity (net
assets) interest in a subsidiary not attributable to the parent company.
To illustrate, assume that Boc Hong acquires 70 percent of the outstanding shares of LTM
Group. Because Boc Hong owns more than 50 percent of LTM, it consolidates LTM’s
financial results with its own. Consolidated net income is then allocated to the controlling
(Boc Hong) and non-controlling shareholders’ percentage of ownership in LTM. In other
words, under this arrangement, the ownership of LTM is divided into two classes: (1) the
controlling interest represented by shareholders who own the majority of the shares, and (2)
the non-controlling interest represented by shareholders who are not part of the controlling
group. When Boc Hong prepares a consolidated income statement, IFRS requires that net
income be allocated to both the controlling and non-controlling interests. This allocation is
reported at the bottom of the income statement, after net income. An example of how Boc
Hong reports its non-controlling interest is shown in Illustration 4.15.

Net income
Attributable to:
 
Shareholders of Boc Hong $120,000
Non-controlling interest
ILLUSTRATION 4.15 Presentation of Non-Controlling Interest
These amounts are to be presented as allocations of net income or net loss, not as an item of
income or expense.
Summary
Illustration 4.16 provides a summary of the primary income items.
As indicated, companies report all revenues, gains, expenses, and losses on the income
statement and, at the end of the period, close them to Income Summary. They provide
useful subtotals on the income statement, such as gross profit, income from operations,
income before income tax, and net income. Companies classify discontinued operations of a
component of a business as a separate item in the income statement, after “Income from
continuing operations.” Companies present other income and expense in a separate section,
before income from operations. Providing intermediate income figures helps readers
evaluate earnings information in assessing the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future
cash flows.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Different Income Concepts
The IASB is working on a project related to the presentation of financial statements. As
part of this project, it conducted field tests on two groups: preparers and users.
Preparers were asked to recast their financial statements and then comment on the
results. Users examined the recast statements and commented on their usefulness.
One part of the field test asked analysts to indicate which primary performance metric
they use or create from a company’s income statement. They were provided with the
following options: (a) Net income; (b) Pretax income; (c) Earnings before interest and
taxes (EBIT); (d) Income before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization
(EBITDA); (e) Operating income; (f) Comprehensive income; and (g) Other. The chart
highlights their responses.
As indicated, Operating income (31%) and EBITDA (27%) were identified as the two
primary performance metrics that respondents use or create from a company’s income
statement. A majority of the respondents identified a primary performance metric that
uses net income as its foundation (pretax income would be in this group). Clearly, users
and preparers look at more than just the bottom line income number, which supports
the IFRS requirement to provide subtotals within the income statement.
In response, the IASB has been moving forward with the project and is now proposing
that additional subtotals be added to the income statement. Specifically, the current
proposal has a new subtotal called “business profit” and EBIT that would be added to
the required information in the income statement.
Source: “FASB-IASB Report on Analyst Field Test Results,” Financial Statement Presentation Informational
Board Meeting (September 21, 2009); and “Primary Financial Statements: Project Overview,” IASB (September

Type of
Situation
Criteria
Examples
Placement on
Income Statement
Sales or
service
revenues
Revenues arising from the
ordinary activities of the
company.
Sales revenue, service
revenue.
Sales or revenue
section.
Cost of goods
sold
Expense arising from the cost
of inventory sold or services
provided.
In a merchandising
company, Cost of
goods sold; in a
service company,
Cost of services.
Deduct from sales (to
arrive at gross profit)
or service revenue.
Selling and
administrative
expenses
Expenses arising from the
ordinary activities of the
company.
Sales salaries,
Freight-out, Rent,
Depreciation,
Utilities.
Deduct from gross
profit; if the function-
of-expense approach
is used, depreciation
and amortization
expense and labor
costs must be
disclosed.
Other income
and expense
Gains and losses and other
ancillary revenues and
expenses.
Gain on sale of long-
lived assets,
Impairment loss on
intangible assets,
Investment revenue,
Dividend and Interest
revenue, Casualty
losses.
Report as part of
income from
operations.
Financing
costs
Separates cost of financing
from operating costs.
Interest expense.
Report in a separate
section between
income from
operations and
income before income
tax.
Income tax
Levies imposed by
governmental bodies on the
basis of income.
Taxes computed on
income before
income tax.
Report in separate
section between
income before income
tax and net income.
Earnings per
share
Must be reported on the face
of the income statement.
Net income minus
preference dividends
divided by weighted
average of ordinary
shares outstanding.
Report separate EPS
for income from
continuing operations
(if applicable) and net
income.
Discontinued
operations
A component of a company
that has either been disposed
of or is classified as held-for-
sale.
A sale by a diversified
company of a major
division representing
its only activities in
the electronics
Report gains or losses
on discontinued
operations net of tax
in a separate section
between income from

industry.
Food distributor that
sells wholesale to
supermarkets decides
to discontinue the
division in a major
geographic area.
continuing operations
and net income.
Non-
controlling
interest
Allocation of net income or
loss divided between two
classes: (1) the majority
interest represented by the
shareholders who own the
controlling interest, and (2)
the non-controlling interest.
Net income (loss)
attributable to non-
controlling
shareholders.
Report as a separate
item below net
income or loss as an
allocation of the net
income or loss (not as
an item of income or
expense).
ILLUSTRATION 4.16 Summary of Various Income Items
Accounting Changes and Errors
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
Changes in Accounting Principle
Changes in accounting occur frequently in practice because important events or conditions
may be in dispute or uncertain at the statement date. One type of accounting change results
when a company adopts a different accounting principle. Changes in accounting
principle include a change in the method of inventory pricing from FIFO to average-cost,
or the change from an existing accounting principle to a new accounting principle (see
Underlying Concepts).14[6]
Underlying Concepts
Companies can change principles, but they must demonstrate that the newly adopted
principle is preferable to the old one. Such changes result in lost consistency from
period to period.
A company recognizes a change in accounting principle by making a retrospective
adjustment to the financial statements. Such an adjustment recasts the prior years’
statements so that they are consistent with the newly adopted principle. The company
records the cumulative effect of the change for prior periods as an adjustment to beginning
retained earnings of the earliest year presented.
To illustrate, Gaubert Inc. (which began operations in 2020) decided in March 2022 to
change from FIFO to weighted-average inventory pricing. Gaubert’s income before income
tax, using the new weighted-average method in 2022, is $30,000. Illustration 4.17
presents the pretax income data for 2020 and 2021 for this example.

Year
FIFO
Weighted-Average Method Excess of FIFO over Weighted-Average Method
Total  
 
ILLUSTRATION 4.17 Calculation of a Change in Accounting Principle
Illustration 4.18 shows the information Gaubert presented in its comparative income
statements, based on a 30 percent tax rate.
 
Income before income tax $30,000 $27,000 $35,000
Income tax
Net income
ILLUSTRATION 4.18 Income Statement Presentation of a Change in
Accounting Principle
Thus, under the retrospective approach, the company recasts the prior years’ income
numbers under the newly adopted method. This approach therefore preserves comparability
across years.
Changes in Accounting Estimates
Changes in accounting estimates are inherent in the accounting process. For example,
companies estimate useful lives and residual values of depreciable assets, uncollectible
receivables, inventory obsolescence, and the number of periods expected to benefit from a
particular expenditure. Not infrequently, due to the passage of time, circumstances, or new
information, even estimates originally made in good faith must be changed. A company
accounts for such changes prospectively, which means in the period of change if they
affect only that period, or in the period of change and future periods if the change affects
both.
To illustrate a change in estimate that affects only the period of change, assume that DuPage
Materials AG consistently estimated its bad debt expense at 1 percent of accounts receivable.
In 2022, however, DuPage determines that it must revise upward the estimate of bad debts
for the current year’s credit sales to 2 percent, or double the prior years’ percentage. The 2
percent rate is necessary to reduce accounts receivable to net realizable value. Using 2
percent results in a bad debt charge of CHF240,000, or double the amount using the 1
percent estimate for prior years. DuPage records the bad debt expense and related allowance
at December 31, 2022, as follows.
Bad Debt Expense
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts  
DuPage includes the entire change in estimate in 2022 income because the effect of the
change does not affect future periods. Companies do not handle changes in estimate
retrospectively. That is, such changes are not carried back to adjust prior years. (We
examine changes in estimate that affect both the current and future periods in greater detail
in Chapter 22.) Changes in estimate are not considered errors.

Corrections of Errors
Errors occur as a result of mathematical mistakes, mistakes in the application of accounting
principles, or oversight or misuse of facts that existed at the time financial statements were
prepared. In recent years, many companies have corrected for errors in their financial
statements. The errors involved such items as improper reporting of revenue, accounting for
share options, allowances for receivables, inventories, and other provisions.
Companies correct errors by making proper entries in the accounts and reporting the
corrections in the financial statements. Corrections of errors are treated as prior period
adjustments, similar to changes in accounting principles. Companies record a correction of
an error in the year in which it is discovered. They report the error in the financial
statements as an adjustment to the beginning balance of retained earnings. If a company
prepares comparative financial statements, it should restate the prior statements for the
effects of the error.
To illustrate, in 2022, Tsang Ltd. determined that it incorrectly overstated its accounts
receivable and sales revenue by NT$100,000 in 2021. In 2022, Tsang makes the following
entry to correct for this error (ignore income taxes).
Retained Earnings
Accounts Receivable  
Retained Earnings is debited because sales revenue, and therefore net income, was
overstated in a prior period. Accounts Receivable is credited to reduce this overstated
balance to the correct amount.
Summary
The impact of changes in accounting principle and error corrections are debited or credited
directly to retained earnings, if related to a prior period. Illustration 4.19 summarizes the
basic concepts related to these two items, as well as the accounting and reporting for
changes in estimates. Although simplified, the chart provides a useful framework for
determining the treatment of special items affecting the income statement.

Type of
Situation
Criteria
Examples
Placement on
Income Statement
Changes in
accounting
principle
Change from
one generally
accepted
accounting
principle to
another.
Change in the basis of inventory pricing
from FIFO to average-cost.
Recast prior years’
income statements
on the same basis as
the newly adopted
principle.
Changes in
accounting
estimates
Normal,
recurring
corrections
and
adjustments.
Changes in the realizability of receivables
and inventories; changes in estimated
lives of equipment, intangible assets;
changes in estimated liability for warranty
costs, income taxes, and salary payments.
Show change only in
the affected accounts
(not shown net of
tax) and disclose the
nature of the change.
Corrections
of errors
Mistake,
misuse of
facts.
Error in reporting income and expense.
Restate prior years’
income statements
to correct for error.
ILLUSTRATION 4.19 Summary of Accounting Changes and Errors
Related Equity Statements
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Describe related equity statements.
Retained Earnings Statement
Net income increases retained earnings. A net loss decreases retained earnings. Both cash
and share dividends decrease retained earnings. Changes in accounting principle (generally)
and prior period adjustments may increase or decrease retained earnings. Companies charge
or credit these adjustments (net of tax) to the opening balance of retained earnings.
Companies may show retained earnings information in different ways. For example, some
companies prepare a separate retained earnings statement, as Illustration 4.20 shows.

Choi Ltd.
Retained Earnings Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Retained earnings, January 1, as reported
 
₩1,050,000
Correction for understatement of net income in prior period
(inventory error)
 
Retained earnings, January 1, as adjusted
 
Add: Net income
 
 
 
Less: Cash dividends
₩100,000  
Share dividends
Retained earnings, December 31
 
₩1,160,000
ILLUSTRATION 4.20 Retained Earnings Statement
The reconciliation of the beginning to the ending balance in retained earnings provides
information about why net assets increased or decreased during the year. The association of
dividend distributions with net income for the period indicates what management is doing
with earnings: It may be “plowing back” into the business part or all of the earnings,
distributing all current income, or distributing current income plus the accumulated
earnings of prior years.
Restrictions of Retained Earnings
Companies often restrict retained earnings to comply with contractual requirements, board
of directors’ policy, or current necessity. Generally, companies disclose in the notes to the
financial statements the amounts of restricted retained earnings. In some cases, companies
transfer the amount of retained earnings restricted to an account titled Appropriated
Retained Earnings. The retained earnings section may therefore report two separate
amounts: (1) retained earnings free (unrestricted) and (2) retained earnings appropriated
(restricted). The total of these two amounts equals the total retained earnings.
Comprehensive Income Statement
Companies generally include in income all revenues, expenses, and gains and losses
recognized during the period. These items are classified within the income statement so that
financial statement readers can better understand the significance of various components of
net income. Changes in accounting principle and corrections of errors are excluded from the
calculation of net income because their effects relate to prior periods.
In recent years, use of fair values for measuring assets and liabilities has increased.
Furthermore, possible reporting of gains and losses related to changes in fair value has
placed a strain on income reporting. Because fair values are continually changing, some
argue that recognizing these gains and losses in net income is misleading. The IASB agrees
and has identified a limited number of transactions that should be recorded directly to
equity. One example is unrealized gains and losses on non-trading equity securities.15 These
gains and losses are excluded from net income, thereby reducing volatility in net income due

to fluctuations in fair value. At the same time, disclosure of the potential gain or loss is
provided.
Companies include these items that bypass the income statement in a measure called
comprehensive income. Comprehensive income includes all changes in equity during a
period except those resulting from investments by owners and distributions to owners.
Comprehensive income, therefore, includes the following: all revenues and gains, expenses
and losses reported in net income, and all gains and losses that bypass net income but affect
equity. These items—non-owner changes in equity that bypass the income statement—are
referred to as other comprehensive income.
Companies must display the components of other comprehensive income in one of two
ways: (1) a single continuous statement (one statement approach) or (2) two separate
but consecutive statements of net income and other comprehensive income (two
statement approach). The one statement approach is often referred to as the statement of
comprehensive income. The two statement approach uses the traditional term income
statement for the first statement and the comprehensive income statement for the second
statement.
Under either approach, companies display each component of net income and each
component of other comprehensive income. In addition, net income and comprehensive
income are reported. Companies are not required to report earnings per share information
related to comprehensive income.16
We illustrate these two alternatives in the next two sections. In each case, assume that Gill
SpA reports the following information for 2022: sales revenue €800,000, cost of goods sold
€600,000, operating expenses €90,000, and an unrealized holding gain on non-trading
equity securities of €30,000, net of tax.
One Statement Approach
In this approach, the traditional net income is a subtotal, with total comprehensive income
shown as a final total. The combined statement has the advantage of not requiring the
creation of a new financial statement. However, burying net income as a subtotal on the
statement is a disadvantage. Illustration 4.21 shows the one statement format for Gill
SpA.

Gill SpA
Statement of Comprehensive Income
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit
Operating expenses
Net income
Other comprehensive income
 
Unrealized holding gain on nontrading equity securities, net of tax
Comprehensive income
ILLUSTRATION 4.21 One Statement Format: Comprehensive Income
Two Statement Approach
Illustration 4.22 shows the two statement format for Gill. Reporting comprehensive
income in a separate statement indicates that the gains and losses identified as other
comprehensive income have the same status as traditional gains and losses.
Gill SpA
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit
Operating expenses
Net income
Gill SpA
Comprehensive Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net income
Other comprehensive income
 
Unrealized holding gain, net of tax
Comprehensive income
ILLUSTRATION 4.22 Two Statement Format: Comprehensive Income
Statement of Changes in Equity
In addition to a statement of comprehensive income, companies are also required to present
a statement of changes in equity. Equity is generally comprised of share capital—
ordinary, share premium—ordinary, retained earnings, and the accumulated balances in
other comprehensive income. The statement reports the change in each equity account and
in total equity for the period. The following items are disclosed in this statement.

1. Accumulated other comprehensive income for the period.
2. Contributions (issuances of shares) and distributions (dividends) to owners.
3. Reconciliation of the carrying amount of each component of equity from the beginning
to the end of the period.
Companies often prepare the statement of changes in equity in column form. In this format,
they use columns for each account and for total equity.
To illustrate, assume the same information for Gill SpA as shown in Illustration 4.22. The
company had the following equity account balances at the beginning of 2022: Share Capital
—Ordinary €300,000, Retained Earnings €50,000, and Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income €60,000, related to unrealized gains on non-trading equity securities. No changes in
the Share Capital—Ordinary account occurred during the year. Cash dividends during the
period were €10,000. Illustration 4.23 shows a statement of changes in equity for Gill.
Total comprehensive income is comprised of net income of €110,000 added to retained
earnings and €30,000 related to the unrealized gain. Separate columns are used to report
each additional item of other comprehensive income.17 Thus, this statement is useful for
understanding how equity changed during the period.
Gill SpA
Statement of Changes in Equity
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
 
Total
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive
Income
Share
Capital—
Ordinary
Beginning balance
Net income
 
Dividends
 
Other comprehensive income
 
 
 
 
Unrealized holding gain on non-
trading equity securities, net of tax
 
 
Ending balance
ILLUSTRATION 4.23 Statement of Changes in Equity
Regardless of the display format used, Gill reports the accumulated other
comprehensive income of €90,000 in the equity section of the statement of financial
position as shown in Illustration 4.24.18

Gill SpA
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
(Equity Section)
Equity
 
Share capital—ordinary
Retained earnings
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Total equity
ILLUSTRATION 4.24 Presentation of Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income in the Statement of Financial Position
By providing information on the components of comprehensive income, as well as
accumulated other comprehensive income, the company communicates information about
all changes in net assets.19 With this information, users will better understand the quality of
the company’s earnings.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accumulated other comprehensive income
Appropriated Retained Earnings
capital maintenance approach
changes in accounting estimates
changes in accounting principle
comprehensive income
discontinued operation
earnings management
earnings per share
function-of-expense method
income statement
intraperiod tax allocation
nature-of-expense method
non-controlling interest
other comprehensive income
other income and expense
prior period adjustments
quality of earnings

statement of comprehensive income (comprehensive income statement)
statement of changes in equity
transaction approach
Learning Objectives Review
1 Identify the uses and limitations of an income statement.
The income statement provides investors and creditors with information that helps them
predict the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. Also, the income
statement helps users determine the risk (level of uncertainty) of not achieving particular
cash flows. The limitations of an income statement are as follows. (1) The statement does
not include many items that contribute to general growth and well-being of a company. (2)
Income numbers are often affected by the accounting methods used. (3) Income measures
are subject to estimates.
2 Describe the content and format of the income statement.
Net income results from revenue, expense, gain, and loss transactions. This method of
income measurement, the transaction approach, focuses on the income-related activities
that have occurred during a given period. Instead of presenting only a net change in net
assets, it discloses the components of the change.
The following sections are generally shown on an income statement: sales or revenue, cost
of goods sold, selling expense, administrative or general expense, financing costs, and
income tax. If present, a company also reports discontinued operations (net of tax). Earnings
per share is reported, and an allocation of net income or loss to the non-controlling interest
is also presented, where applicable. Companies determine net income by deducting expenses
from revenues but also classify various revenues and expenses in order to report useful
subtotals within the income statement. These subtotals are gross profit, income from
operations, income before income tax, and a final total, net income.
3 Discuss how to report various income items.
Companies generally provide some detail on revenues and expenses on the face of the
income statement but may prepare a condensed income statement with details on various
components presented in the notes to the financial statements. Companies are required to
classify expense either by nature or by function. Unusual and non-recurring items should be
reported in income from operations, but financing costs are reported separate from
operating revenues and expenses. Companies report the effects of discontinued operations
of a component of a business as a separate item, after income from continuing operations.
Companies should relate the tax expense for the year to specific items on the income
statement to provide a more informative disclosure to statement users. This procedure,
intraperiod tax allocation, relates the income tax expense for the fiscal period to the
following items that affect the amount of the tax provisions: (1) income from continuing
operations and (2) discontinued operations.

Companies must disclose earnings per share on the face of the income statement. A
company that reports a discontinued operation must report per share amounts for these line
items either on the face of the income statement or in the notes to the financial statements.
4 Explain the reporting of accounting changes and errors.
Changes in accounting principle and corrections of errors are adjusted through retained
earnings following a retrospective approach. Changes in accounting estimates are a normal
part of the accounting process. The effects of these changes are handled prospectively, with
the effects recorded in income in the period of change and in future periods without
adjustment to retained earnings.
5 Describe related equity statements.
The retained earnings statement should disclose net income (loss), dividends, adjustments
due to changes in accounting principles, error corrections, and restrictions of retained
earnings.
Companies report the components of other comprehensive income in one of two ways: (1) a
combined statement of comprehensive income (one statement format) or (2) in a second
statement (two statement format).
Companies also present a statement of changes in equity. This statement reports the change
in each equity account and in total equity for the period.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions,
and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Presented below are income statement items from Braun Company for the year ended
December 31, 2022.
Sales revenue
Cost of goods sold
Interest revenue
Loss from abandonment of plant assets
Gain from extinguishment of debt
Selling and administrative expenses
Effect of change in estimated useful lives of fixed assets
Loss from earthquake
Gain on disposal of discontinued operation
Instructions

a. Using the information above, prepare an income statement. Assume a tax rate of 30%
and 100,000 ordinary shares outstanding during 2022.
b. Compute comprehensive income for Braun in 2022, assuming Braun had an
unrealized holding loss on non-trading equity securities of $12,000, net of tax.
Solution
a. 
Braun Company
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Sales revenue
 
Cost of goods sold
 
Gross profit
 
Selling and administrative expenses
 
 
 
Other income and expense
 
 
Interest revenue
Gain on debt extinguishment
Loss from plant abandonment
Loss from earthquake
Income from operations
 
Income tax (30%)
 
Income from continuing operations
 
Discontinued operations
 
 
Gain on disposal of discontinued operation
Less: Applicable income tax (30%)
Net income
 
$
Per ordinary share
 
 
Income from continuing operations
 
$
Discontinued operations
 
Net income
 
$
b. 
Net income
Unrealized holding loss on non-trading
equity securities, net of tax
 
Comprehensive income
 

Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Questions
1. What kinds of questions about future cash flows do investors and creditors attempt to
answer with information in the income statement?
2. How can information based on past transactions be used to predict future cash flows?
3. Identify at least two situations in which important changes in value are not reported in
the income statement.
4. Identify at least two situations in which application of different accounting methods or
accounting estimates results in difficulties in comparing companies.
5. Explain the transaction approach to measuring income. Why is the transaction approach
to income measurement preferable to other ways of measuring income?
6. What is earnings management?
7. How can earnings management affect the quality of earnings?
8. Why should caution be exercised in the use of the net income figure derived in an income
statement? What are the objectives of IFRS in its application to the income statement?
9. An article in the financial press noted that MicroStrategy (USA) reported higher income
than its competitors by using a more aggressive policy for recognizing revenue on future
upgrades to its products. Some contend that MicroStrategy’s quality of earnings is low. What
does the term “quality of earnings” mean?
10. What is the major distinction between income and expenses under IFRS?
11. Do the elements of financial statements, income and expense, include gains and losses?
Explain.
12. What are the sections of the income statement that comprise (1) gross profit and (2)
income from operations?
13. Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL), in its consolidated income statement, reported a
“settlement of securities class action” €803 million loss. In what section of the income
statement is this amount reported?
14. Explain where the following items are reported on the income statement: (1) interest
expense and (2) income tax.
15. Explain the difference between the “nature-of-expense” and “function-of-expense”
classifications.
16. Discuss the appropriate treatment in the income statement for the following items:
a. Loss on discontinued operations.
b. Non-controlling interest allocation.
c. Earnings per share.

d. Gain on sale of equipment.
17. Discuss the appropriate treatment in the financial statements of each of the following.
a. Write-down of plant assets due to impairment.
b. A delivery expense on goods sold.
c. Additional depreciation on factory machinery because of an error in computing
depreciation for the previous year.
d. Rent received from subletting a portion of the office space.
e. A patent infringement suit, brought 2 years ago against the company, was settled this
year by a cash payment of NT$725,000.
f. A reduction in the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts balance, because the account
appears to be considerably in excess of the probable loss from uncollectible receivables.
18. Indicate where the following items would ordinarily appear on the financial statements
of Boleyn, plc for the year 2022.
a. The service life of certain equipment was changed from 8 to 5 years. If a 5-year life had
been used previously, additional depreciation of £425,000 would have been charged.
b. In 2022, a flood destroyed a warehouse that had a book value of £1,600,000.
c. In 2022, the company wrote off £1,000,000 of inventory that was considered obsolete.
d. Interest expense for the year was £45,000.
e. In 2019, a supply warehouse with an expected useful life of 7 years was erroneously
expensed.
f. Boleyn, plc changed from weighted-average to FIFO inventory pricing.
19. Indicate the section of an income statement in which each of the following is shown.
a. Loss on inventory write-down.
b. Loss from strike.
c. Bad debt expense.
d. Loss on disposal of a discontinued business.
e. Gain on sale of machinery.
f. Interest expense.
g. Depreciation expense.
h. Interest revenue.
20. Santo SA has eight expense accounts in its general ledger which could be classified as
selling expenses. Should Santo report these eight expenses separately in its income
statement or simply report one total amount for selling expenses? Explain.
21. Cooper Investments reported an unusual gain from the sale of certain assets in its 2022
income statement. How does intraperiod tax allocation affect the reporting of this unusual

gain?
22. What effect does intraperiod tax allocation have on reported net income?
23. Neumann Company computed earnings per share as follows.
Neumann has a simple capital structure. What possible errors might the company have
made in the computation? Explain.
24. How should a loss on the disposal of a discontinued business be disclosed in the income
statement?
25. Qualls SE reported 2021 earnings per share of €7.21. In 2022, Qualls reported earnings
per share as follows.
On income from continuing operations €8.00
On loss on discontinued operations
On net income
Is the decrease in earnings per share from €7.21 to €7.12 a negative trend? Explain.
26. What is meant by “tax allocation within a period”? What is the justification for such a
practice?
27. When does tax allocation within a period become necessary? How should this allocation
be handled?
28. Linus Paper Company decided to close two small pulp mills in Conway, New
Hampshire, and Corvallis, Oregon. Would these closings be reported in a separate section
entitled “Discontinued operations after income from continuing operations”? Discuss.
29. How should corrections of errors be reported in the financial statements?
30. Explain how a change in accounting principle affects the current year’s net income.
31. What major types of items are reported in the retained earnings statement?
32. IFRS usually requires the use of accrual accounting to “fairly present” income. If the
cash receipts and disbursements method of accounting will “clearly reflect” taxable income,
why does this method also not usually “fairly present” income?
33. What are two ways that other comprehensive income may be displayed (reported)?
34. Gribble AG reported the following amounts in 2022: Net income, €150,000; Unrealized
gain related to revaluation of buildings, €10,000, net of tax; Unrealized loss related to non-
trading equity securities, €(35,000), net of tax. Determine Gribble’s total comprehensive
income for 2022.
Brief Exercises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the income statement under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
Standards issued by the FASB (U.S. GAAP) are the primary global alternative to IFRS. As in
IFRS, the income statement is a required statement for U.S. GAAP. In addition, the content
and presentation of the U.S. GAAP income statement are similar to those used for IFRS. A
number of U.S. GAAP standards have been issued that provide guidance on issues related to
income statement presentation.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
the income statement.
Similarities
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS require companies to indicate the amount of net income
attributable to non-controlling interest.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS follow the same presentation guidelines for discontinued
operations, but IFRS defines a discontinued operation more narrowly. Both standard-

setters have indicated a willingness to develop a similar definition to be used in the
joint project on financial statement presentation.
Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS have items that are recognized in equity as part of other
comprehensive income but do not affect net income. Both U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow a
one statement or two statement approach to preparing the statement of comprehensive
income.
Differences
Presentation of the income statement under U.S. GAAP follows either a single-step or
multiple-step format. IFRS does not mention a single-step or multiple-step approach.
The U.S. SEC requires companies to have a functional presentation of expenses. Under
IFRS, companies must classify expenses by either nature or function. U.S. GAAP does
not have that requirement.
U.S. GAAP has no minimum information requirements for the income statement.
However, the U.S. SEC rules have more rigorous presentation requirements. IFRS
identifies certain minimum items that should be presented on the income statement.
U.S. SEC regulations define many key measures and provide requirements and
limitations on companies reporting non-U.S. GAAP information. IFRS does not define
key measures like income from operations.
U.S. GAAP does not permit revaluation accounting. Under IFRS, revaluation of property,
plant, and equipment, and intangible assets is permitted and is reported as other
comprehensive income. The effect of this difference is that application of IFRS results
in more transactions affecting equity but not net income.
About the Numbers
The terminology used in the IFRS literature is sometimes different than what is used in U.S.
GAAP. For example, here are some of the differences related to this chapter.
IFRS
U.S. GAAP
Equity or shareholders’
equity
Shareholders’ equity or stockholders’ equity
Share capital—ordinary
Common stock
Share capital—preference
Preferred stock
Ordinary shares
Common shares
Preference shares
Preferred shares
Share premium—ordinary
Premium on common stock or Paid-in capital in excess of par—
common
Share premium—
preference
Premium on preferred stock or Paid-in capital in excess of par—
preferred
Reserves
Retained earnings and accumulated other comprehensive
income
Statement of financial
position
Balance sheet or Statement of financial position

Profit or loss
Net income or Net loss
On the Horizon
At one time, the IASB and the FASB worked on a project to converge their standards related
to financial statement presentation, including the income statement. A key feature of that
project was that each of the statements would be organized in the same format, to separate
an entity’s financing activities from its operating and investing activities, and to separate
financing activities into transactions with owners and creditors. Thus, the same
classifications used in the income statement could be used in the statement of cash flows
and the statement of financial position. That original convergence project has been on hold,
and both Boards are now focusing on performance reporting (the income statement). The
Boards expect to issue similar new guidelines for reporting in the income statement,
involving additional income subtotals and increased disaggregation—referred to as
additional “rows and columns”—to provide more useful information in the income
statement. Go to the IASB and FASB websites and search performance reporting for more
information.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which of the following is required to be reported in an income statement under U.S.
GAAP but not under IFRS?
a. Discontinued operations.
b. Income from operations.
c. Cost of goods sold.
d. Income tax.
2. Which of the following statements is correct regarding income reporting under IFRS
compared to U.S. GAAP?
a. IFRS does not permit revaluation of property, plant, and equipment, and intangible
assets.
b. IFRS provides the same options for reporting comprehensive income as U.S. GAAP.
c. Companies must classify expenses by nature.
d. IFRS provides a definition for all items presented in the income statement.
3. Under U.S. GAAP:
a. companies must report comprehensive income in a single statement.
b. companies must report comprehensive income using a two statement approach.
c. companies must report income using a multiple step format.
d. companies can report comprehensive income using either a one statement or two
statement approach.
4. The non-controlling interest section of the income statement is:

a. required under U.S. GAAP but not under IFRS.
b. required under IFRS but not under U.S. GAAP.
c. required under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
d. not reported under U.S. GAAP or IFRS.
5. Common terminology under U.S. GAAP includes all of the following except:
a. common stock.
b. retained earnings.
c. net income/loss.
d. reserves.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP 4.1 What are U.S. GAAP’s requirements with respect to expense classification?
GAAP 4.2 Bradshaw Company experienced a loss that was deemed to be both unusual in
nature and infrequent in occurrence. How should Bradshaw report this item in accordance
with U.S. GAAP?
GAAP 4.3 Explain the U.S. GAAP reporting guidelines for items recognized in
comprehensive income that do not affect net income.
GAAP 4.4 Presented below is the income statement for Campbell Soup Company
(USA). Campbell prepares its financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
 
Net sales
Costs and expenses
 
 
 
Cost of products sold
Marketing and selling expenses
Administrative expenses
Research and development expenses
Other expenses (income)
Restructuring charges
Total costs and expenses
Earnings before interest and taxes
Interest expense
Interest income
—
Earnings before taxes
Taxes on earnings
Earnings from continuing operations
Loss from discontinued operations
Net earnings

Less: Net earnings (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests
—
—
—
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
Per Share—Basic
 
 
 
Earnings from continuing operations attributable to Campbell
Soup Company
Loss from discontinued operations
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
Weighted average shares outstanding—basic
Per Share—Assuming Dilution
 
 
 
Earnings from continuing operations attributable to Campbell
Soup Company
Loss from discontinued operations
Net earnings attributable to Campbell Soup Company
Weighted average shares outstanding—assuming dilution
Instructions
a. Review the Campbell income statement and identify similarities and differences
between the U.S. GAAP income statement and an income statement of an IFRS
company as presented in the chapter.
b. Identify non-recurring items reported by Campbell, if any. Is the reporting of these non-
recurring items in the income statement under U.S. GAAP similar to reporting of these
items in IFRS companies’ income statements? Explain.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. b 2. b 3. d 4. c 5. d
Notes
1 We will use the term income statement except in situations where a company reports other
comprehensive income (discussed later in the chapter). In that case, we will use the term
statement of comprehensive income or comprehensive income statement. Also,
note that IFRS uses other names to refer to the income statement, including the
statement of profit or loss, and the statement of financial performance.
2 In support of the usefulness of income information, accounting researchers have
documented an association between the market prices of companies and reported
income. See W. H. Beaver, “Perspectives on Recent Capital Markets Research,” The
Accounting Review (April 2002), pp. 453–474.
3 A. Levitt, “The Numbers Game.” Remarks to NYU Center for Law and Business, September
28, 1998 (Securities and Exchange Commission, 1998). A recent study indicates that
earnings management is pervasive across U.S., European, and Asian companies, whether
they use U.S. GAAP or IFRS. See M. Evans, R. Houston, M. Peters, and J. Pratt,
“Reporting Regulatory Environments and Earnings Management: U.S. and Non-U.S.

Firms Using U.S. GAAP or IFRS,” The Accounting Review (September 2015), pp. 1969–
4 The most common alternative to the transaction approach is the capital maintenance
approach to income measurement. Under this approach, a company determines income
for the period based on the change in equity, after adjusting for capital contributions (e.g.,
investments by owners) or distributions (e.g., dividends). The main drawback associated
with the capital maintenance approach is that the components of income are not evident
in its measurement. Various tax authorities use the capital maintenance approach to
identify unreported income and refer to this approach as the “net worth check.”
5 The IASB takes the position that income includes both revenues and gains because they
both reflect increases in economic benefits. Similarly, expenses include both expenses
and losses because they both reflect decreases in economic benefits.
6 If a company prepares a statement of comprehensive income, then disclosure is required
for (1) other comprehensive income classified by nature, (2) comprehensive income of
associates and joint ventures, and (3) total comprehensive income. The statement of
comprehensive income is discussed in more detail later in the chapter.
7 Manufacturing companies that follow the nature-of-expense method generally report
direct labor, raw materials used, and changes in inventory related to work-in-process and
finished goods. The overhead items are listed as basic expenses. If the function-of-
expense method is used, depreciation expense, amortization expense, and labor costs
must also be disclosed because this information is considered useful for predicting future
cash flows.
8 Accounting Trends and Techniques (New York: AICPA) and IFRS Accounting Trends and
Techniques (New York: AICPA).
9 As indicated in the opening story, the IASB is working on a project on financial statement
presentation, on how to best report income as well as information presented in the
statement of financial position and the statement of cash flows.
10 D. McDermott, “Latest Profit Data Stir Old Debate Between Net and Operating Income,”
Wall Street Journal (May 3, 1999); and T. Shumsky, “IASB Chair Rings Alarm Over Use of
Non-GAAP Measures,” Wall Street Journal (May 11, 2016).
11 In calculating earnings per share, companies deduct preference dividends from net
income if the dividends are declared or if they are cumulative, though not declared. In
addition, any amount allocated to the non-controlling interest should be deducted from
net income in determining earnings per share.
12 We discuss the computational problems involved in accounting for these dilutive
securities in earnings per share computations in Chapter 16.
13 In practice, companies are required to report only one line on the income statement, such
as “Loss on discontinued operations,” and then in the notes explain the two loss
components that total £800,000. For homework purposes, report both amounts on the
face of the income statement, net of tax, if both amounts are provided.

14 Formally, an entity changes an accounting principle when the change is required by IFRS
or the change results in the financial statements providing a more reliable and faithfully
representative depiction of the effect of transactions or events. IAS 8 refers to this as a
change in accounting policy. In Chapter 22, we examine in greater detail the problems
related to accounting changes, and changes in estimates (discussed in the next section).
15 We further discuss non-trading equity securities in Chapter 17. Additional examples of
other comprehensive items are translation gains and losses on foreign currency,
unrealized gains and losses on certain hedging transactions (Chapter 17 Appendix),
actuarial gains and losses in certain situations (Chapter 20), and changes in revaluation
surplus (Chapters 11 and 12).
16 A company must display the components of other comprehensive income either (1) net of
related tax effects, or (2) before related tax effects, with one amount shown for the
aggregate amount of tax related to the total amount of other comprehensive income. Both
alternatives must show each component of other comprehensive income, net of related
taxes, either on the face of the statement or in the notes. [7]
17 The other comprehensive income section shall present line items for amounts of other
comprehensive income, grouped into those that, in accordance with other IFRSs, (a) will
not be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss, and (b) will be reclassified subsequently
to profit or loss when specific conditions are met. If a company has non-controlling
interest, an additional column would be added to report changes in non-controlling
interest amounts. [8]
18 Many companies use the term Reserve to include all items in equity except for
contributed capital. Contributed capital is comprised of Share Capital (ordinary and
preference) and Share Premium (ordinary and preference). Rather than the term Reserve,
we use Retained Earnings and Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income because these
concepts are more descriptive of the items in the equity section.
19 Corrections of errors and changes in accounting principle are not considered other
comprehensive income items.
Sources: H. Hoogervorst, “The Imprecise World of Accounting,” Speech to the International Association for Accounting
Education and Research (June 20, 2012); and N. Trentmann, “IASB Plans Overhaul of Financial Definitions,” Wall
Street Journal (November 2, 2016); and “Primary Financial Statements: Project Overview” (IASB: September 2018).