CHAPTER 11
Depreciation, Impairments, and Depletion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe depreciation concepts and methods of depreciation.
2. Identify other depreciation issues.
3. Explain the accounting issues related to asset impairment.
4. Discuss the accounting procedures for depletion of mineral resources.
5. Apply the accounting for revaluations.
6. Demonstrate how to report and analyze property, plant, equipment, and mineral
resources.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 11
As noted in the following opening story, many companies, such as LG Electronics
(KOR), are affected by impairment rules. These rules recognize that when economic
conditions deteriorate, companies may need to write off an asset’s cost to indicate the
decline in its usefulness. The purpose of this chapter is to examine the depreciation
process and the methods of writing off the cost of property, plant, equipment, and
mineral resources. The content and organization of the chapter are as follows.
Here Come the Write-Offs

Most people love it when a new technology comes along that makes their lives easier and
more efficient. As a result, technology companies are in constant competition to come up
with the latest, best consumer technology that will allow them to increase revenues and
market share.
The downside of this competition is that companies often have invested substantially in
creating the infrastructure to produce the latest and best technology. However, when a
new technology does emerge, the companies often find themselves with substantial
remaining investments in the property, plant, and equipment associated with the previous
generation of technology.
This kind of rapid, and often unexpected, change can give rise to impairment losses. An
impairment loss occurs when the carrying value of the property, plant, and equipment is
greater than the current value of the same assets. We discuss in this chapter how the
current value is determined, but for now we will simply highlight what happens when this
occurs.
For example, the InnoTek Division at LG Electronics (KOR) had recently invested
substantially in the design and manufacturing of products related to pet safety, including
in-ground pet fencing. During the year, the company had experienced decreasing demand
for its products related to competition and a general slowing in the economy. As a result,
the company recorded a ₩5,054 million impairment loss allocated to machinery and
tools.
Sony Corporation (JPN) found itself in a similar situation during the same period. The
company recorded a ¥19.2 billion impairment loss related to its Semiconductor segment
for the property, plant, and equipment used to produce high-function camera modules
that had been sold to mobile phone manufacturers that were being discontinued.
Lastly, consider Husqvarna Group (SWE), which manufactures outdoor power
products. In the most recent period, the company reported kr444 million in impairment
losses for its property, plant, and equipment due to obsolescence in some of its
manufacturing facilities. This amount was almost half as large as its depreciation expense
of kr946 million for the same period.
Here are some of the questions that will need to be addressed regarding possible
impairments.
1. How often should a company test for impairment?
2. What are key impairment indicators?
3. What types of disclosures are necessary for impairments?
4. What is the process that companies use to match their cash flows to the asset that is
potentially impaired?
Assessing whether a company has impaired assets is difficult. On the technical side,
assumptions on cash flows must be reasonable, supportable, and cross-checked to ensure
the final answer reconciles to external market data. And in discounting future cash flows,
companies must determine the appropriate discount rate.

In addition to the technical accounting issues, the environment can change quickly.
Reduced spending by consumers, lack of confidence in global economic decisions, and
higher volatility in both share and commodity markets are factors to consider.
Nevertheless, for investors and creditors to have assurance that the amounts reported on
the statement of financial position for property, plant, and equipment are relevant and
representationally faithful, appropriate impairment charges must be reported on a timely
basis.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with
solutions, are also available online.
Depreciation—A Method of Cost Allocation
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe depreciation concepts and methods of depreciation.
Most individuals at one time or another purchase and trade in an automobile. The
automobile dealer and the buyer typically discuss what the trade-in value of the old car is.
Also, they may talk about what the trade-in value of the new car will be in several years.
In both cases, a decline in value is considered to be an example of depreciation.
To accountants, however, depreciation is not a matter of valuation. Rather, depreciation
is the systematic allocation of the depreciable amount of an asset to expense
over its useful life. [1] (See the Authoritative Literature References section near the
end of the chapter.) For example, a company like Enhance Electronics Co., Ltd.
(TWN) does not depreciate assets on the basis of a decline in their fair value. Instead, it
depreciates through systematic charges to expense.
This approach is employed because the value of the asset may fluctuate between the time
the asset is purchased and the time it is sold or junked. Attempts to measure these
interim value changes have not been well received because values are difficult to measure
objectively. Therefore, Enhance Electronics charges the asset’s cost to depreciation
expense over its estimated life. It makes no attempt to value the asset at fair value
between acquisition and disposition. Companies use the cost allocation approach because
it matches costs with revenues and because fluctuations in fair value are uncertain and
difficult to measure.
When companies write off the cost of long-lived assets over a number of periods, they
typically use the term depreciation. They use the term depletion to describe the
reduction in the cost of mineral resources (such as oil, gas, and coal) over a period of
time. The expiration of intangible assets, such as patents or copyrights, is called
amortization (discussed in Chapter 12).

Factors Involved in the Depreciation Process
Before establishing a pattern of charges to revenue, a company must answer three basic
questions:
1. What depreciable base is to be used for the asset?
2. What is the asset’s useful life?
3. What method of cost apportionment is best for this asset?
The answers to these questions involve combining several estimates into one single
figure. Note the calculations assume perfect knowledge of the future, which is never
attainable.
Depreciable Base for the Asset
The base established for depreciation is a function of two factors: the original cost and
residual value. We discussed historical cost in Chapter 10. Residual value (often
referred to as salvage value) is the estimated amount that a company will receive when
it sells the asset or removes it from service.1 It is the amount to which a company writes
down or depreciates the asset during its useful life. As Illustration 11.1 shows, if an
asset has a cost of €10,000 and a residual value of €1,000, its depreciable base is
Original cost
Less: Residual value
Depreciable base
ILLUSTRATION 11.1 Computation of Depreciable Base
From a practical standpoint, companies often assign a zero residual value. Some long-
lived assets, however, have substantial residual values.
Estimation of Service Lives
The service life of an asset often differs from its physical life. A piece of machinery may be
physically capable of producing a given product for many years beyond its service life. But
a company may not use the equipment for all that time because the cost of manufacturing
the product in later years may be too high.
Companies retire assets for two reasons: physical factors (such as casualty or
expiration of physical life) and economic factors (obsolescence). Physical factors are
the wear and tear, decay, and casualties that make it difficult for the asset to perform
indefinitely. These physical factors set the outside limit for the service life of an asset.
We can classify the economic or functional factors into three categories:
1. Inadequacy results when an asset ceases to be useful to a company because the
demands of the firm have changed. An example would be the need for a larger
building to handle increased production. Although the old building may still be
sound, it may have become inadequate for the company’s purpose.

2. Supersession is the replacement of one asset with another more efficient and
economical asset. Examples would be the replacement of the mainframe computer
with a PC network, or the replacement of the Boeing 767 airplane with the Boeing
3. Obsolescence is the catchall for situations not involving inadequacy and
supersession.
Because the distinction between these categories appears artificial, it is probably best to
consider economic factors collectively instead of trying to make distinctions that are not
clear-cut.
To illustrate the concepts of physical and economic factors, consider a new nuclear power
plant. Which is more important in determining the useful life of a nuclear power plant—
physical factors or economic factors? The limiting factors seem to be (1) ecological
considerations, (2) competition from other power sources, and (3) safety concerns.
Physical life does not appear to be the primary factor affecting useful life. Although the
plant’s physical life may be far from over, the plant may become obsolete in 10 years.
For a house, physical factors undoubtedly are more important than the economic or
functional factors relative to useful life. Whenever the physical nature of the asset
primarily determines useful life, maintenance plays an extremely vital role. The better the
maintenance, the longer the life of the asset.2
Most companies estimate the useful life of an asset based on their past experiences with
the same or similar assets. Others use sophisticated statistical methods to establish a
useful life for accounting purposes. And, in some cases, companies select arbitrary service
lives. In highly industrial economies, where research and innovation are so prominent,
technological factors have as much effect on service lives of tangible plant assets as do
physical factors, if not more.
Methods of Depreciation
The third factor involved in the depreciation process is the method of cost
apportionment. The profession requires that the depreciation method employed be
“systematic and rational.” To be systematic and rational, the depreciation method should
reflect the pattern in which the asset’s future economic benefits are expected to be
consumed by the company (see Underlying Concepts). [3] Companies may use a
number of depreciation methods, as follows.
Underlying Concepts
Depreciation attempts to allocate the cost of an asset to the periods that benefit from
the use of that asset.
1. Activity method (units of use or production).
2. Straight-line method.
3. Diminishing (accelerated)-charge methods:

a. Sum-of-the-years’-digits.
b. Declining-balance method.3
To illustrate these depreciation methods, assume that Stanley Coal Mines recently
purchased an additional crane for hoisting purposes. Illustration 11.2 contains the
pertinent data concerning this purchase.
Cost of crane
Estimated useful life
5 years
Estimated residual value
Productive life in hours
30,000 hours
ILLUSTRATION 11.2 Data Used to Illustrate Depreciation Methods
Activity Method
The activity method (also called the variable-charge or units-of-production
approach) assumes that depreciation is a function of use or productivity, instead
of the passage of time. A company considers the life of the asset in terms of either the
output it provides (units it produces) or an input measure such as the number of hours
it works. Conceptually, the proper cost association relies on output instead of hours used,
but often the output is not easily measurable. In such cases, an input measure such as
machine hours is a more appropriate method of measuring the dollar amount of
depreciation charges for a given accounting period.
The crane poses no particular depreciation problem. Stanley can measure the usage
(hours) relatively easily. If Stanley uses the crane for 4,000 hours the first year, the
depreciation charge is as shown in Illustration 11.3.
= Depreciation Charge
= $60,000
ILLUSTRATION 11.3 Depreciation Calculation, Activity Method—Crane
Example
The major limitation of this method is that it is inappropriate in situations in which
depreciation is a function of time instead of activity. For example, a building steadily
deteriorates due to the elements (time) regardless of its use. In addition, where economic
or functional factors affect an asset, independent of its use, the activity method loses
much of its significance. For example, if a company is expanding rapidly, a particular
building may soon become obsolete for its intended purposes. In both cases, activity is
irrelevant. Another problem in using an activity method is the difficulty of estimating
units of output or service hours received.
In cases where loss of services results from activity or productivity, the activity method
matches costs and revenues the best. Companies that prefer low depreciation during
(Cost −Residual Value) × Hours This Year
Total Estimated Hours
($500,000 −$50,000) × 4,000

periods of low productivity, and high depreciation during high productivity, either adopt
or switch to an activity method. In this way, a plant running at 40 percent of capacity
generates 60 percent lower depreciation charges.
Straight-Line Method
The straight-line method considers depreciation as a function of time rather than
as a function of usage. Companies widely use this method because of its simplicity.
The straight-line procedure is often the most conceptually appropriate, too (see
Underlying Concepts). When creeping obsolescence is the primary reason for a limited
service life, the decline in usefulness may be constant from period to period. Stanley
computes the depreciation charge for the crane as shown in Illustration 11.4.
Underlying Concepts
If benefits flow on a “straight-line” basis, then justification exists for matching the
cost of the asset on a straight-line basis with these benefits.
= Depreciation Charge
= $90,000
ILLUSTRATION 11.4 Depreciation Calculation, Straight-Line Method—
Crane Example
The major objection to the straight-line method is that it rests on two tenuous
assumptions: (1) the asset’s economic usefulness is the same each year, and (2) the
maintenance and repair expense is essentially the same each period.
One additional problem that occurs in using the straight-line method—as well as some
others—is that distortions in the rate of return analysis (income ÷ assets) develop.
Illustration 11.5 indicates how the rate of return increases, given constant revenue
flows, because the asset’s book value decreases.
Year
Depreciation
Expense
Undepreciated Asset
Balance (Book Value)
Income (After
Depreciation
Expense)
Rate of Return
(Income ÷ Assets)
 
 
ILLUSTRATION 11.5 Depreciation and Rate of Return Analysis—Crane
Example
Cost  − Residual Value
Estimated Service Life
$500,000 −$50,000

Diminishing-Charge Methods
The diminishing-charge methods provide for a higher depreciation cost in the earlier
years and lower charges in later periods. Because these methods allow for higher early-
year charges than in the straight-line method, they are often called accelerated
depreciation methods.
What is the main justification for this approach? The rationale is that companies should
charge more depreciation in earlier years because the asset is most productive in its
earlier years (see Underlying Concepts). Furthermore, the accelerated methods provide
a constant cost because the depreciation charge is lower in the later periods, at the time
when the maintenance and repair costs are often higher. Generally, companies use one of
two diminishing-charge methods: the sum-of-the-years’-digits method or the declining-
balance method.
Underlying Concepts
The expense recognition concept often does not justify a constant charge to income.
If the benefits from the asset decline as the asset ages, then a diminishing charge to
income better matches cost to benefits.
Sum-of-the-Years’-Digits
The sum-of-the-years’-digits method results in a decreasing depreciation charge
based on a decreasing fraction of depreciable cost (original cost less residual value). Each
fraction uses the sum of the years as a denominator (5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 15). The
numerator is the number of years of estimated life remaining as of the beginning of the
year. In this method, the numerator decreases year by year, and the denominator remains
constant (5⁄15, 4⁄15, 3⁄15, 2⁄15, and 1⁄15). At the end of the asset’s useful life, the balance
remaining should equal the residual value. Illustration 11.6 shows this method of
computation.4
Year
Depreciable
Base
Remaining Life
in Years
Depreciation
Fraction
Depreciation
Expense
Book Value, End
of Year
5⁄15
4⁄15
3⁄15
2⁄15
1⁄15
50,000a
 
15⁄15
aResidual value.
ILLUSTRATION 11.6 Sum-of-the-Years’-Digits Depreciation Schedule—
Crane Example

Declining-Balance Method
The declining-balance method (often referred to as the reducing-balance method)
utilizes a depreciation rate (expressed as a percentage) that is some multiple of the
straight-line rate. For example, the double-declining rate for a 10-year asset is 20 percent
(double the straight-line rate, which is 1⁄10, or 10 percent). Companies apply the constant
rate to the declining book value each year.
Unlike other methods, the declining-balance method does not deduct the residual
value in computing the depreciable base. The declining-balance rate is multiplied by the
book value of the asset at the beginning of each period. Since the depreciation charge
reduces the book value of the asset each period, applying the constant-declining-balance
rate to a successively lower book value results in lower depreciation charges each year.
This process continues until the book value of the asset equals its estimated residual
value. At that time, the company discontinues depreciation.
Companies use various multiples in practice. For example, the double-declining-
balance method depreciates assets at twice (200 percent) the straight-line rate.
Illustration 11.7 shows Stanley’s depreciation charges if using the double-declining
approach.
Year
Book Value of
Asset First of Year
Rate on
Declining
Balancea
Depreciation
Expense
Balance
Accumulated
Depreciation
Book Value,
End of Year
14,800b
aBased on twice the straight-line rate of 20% ($90,000 ÷ $450,000 = .20; .20 × 2 = .40, or 40%).
bLimited to $14,800 because book value should not be less than residual value.
ILLUSTRATION 
Double-Declining 
Depreciation 
Schedule—Crane
Example
Companies often switch from the declining-balance method to the straight-line method
near the end of the asset’s useful life to ensure that they depreciate the asset only to its
residual value.5
Other Depreciation Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify other depreciation issues.

Component Depreciation
As indicated in Chapter 10, companies are required to use component depreciation.
IFRS requires that each part of an item of property, plant, and equipment that is
significant to the total cost of the asset must be depreciated separately. Companies
therefore have to exercise judgment to determine the proper allocations to the
components. As an example, when a company like Nokia (FIN) purchases a building, it
must determine how the various building components (e.g., the foundation, structure,
roof, heating and cooling system, and elevators) should be segregated and depreciated.
To illustrate the accounting for component depreciation, assume that EuroAsia Airlines
purchases an airplane for €100,000,000 on January 1, 2023. The airplane has a useful life
of 20 years and a residual value of €0. EuroAsia uses the straight-line method of
depreciation for all its airplanes. EuroAsia identifies the following components, amounts,
and useful lives, as shown in Illustration 11.8.
Components
Component Amount Component Useful Life
Airframe
20 years
Engine components
8 years
Other components
5 years
ILLUSTRATION 11.8 Airplane Components
Illustration 11.9 shows the computation of depreciation expense for EuroAsia for 2023.
Components
Component Amount ÷ Useful Life = Component Depreciation
Airframe
Engine components
Other components
Total
 
ILLUSTRATION 11.9 Computation of Component Depreciation
As indicated, EuroAsia records depreciation expense of €8,600,000 in 2023 as follows.
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment  
On the statement of financial position at the end of 2023, EuroAsia reports the airplane as
a single amount. The presentation is shown in Illustration 11.10.
Non-current assets
 
Airplane
Less: Accumulated depreciation—airplane
 
ILLUSTRATION 11.10 Presentation of Carrying Amount of Airplane

In many situations, a company may not have a good understanding of the cost of the
individual components purchased. In that case, the cost of individual components should
be estimated based on reference to current market prices (if available), discussion with
experts in valuation, or use of other reasonable approaches.
Depreciation and Partial Periods
Companies seldom purchase plant assets on the first day of a fiscal period or dispose of
them on the last day of a fiscal period. A practical question is: How much depreciation
should a company charge for the partial periods involved?
In computing depreciation expense for partial periods, companies must determine the
depreciation expense for the full year and then prorate this depreciation expense between
the two periods involved. This process should continue throughout the useful life of the
asset.
Assume, for example, that Steeltex Ltd. purchases an automated drill machine with a five-
year life for £45,000 (no residual value) on June 10, 2022. The company’s fiscal year ends
December 31. Steeltex therefore charges depreciation for only six and two-third months
during that year. The total depreciation for a full year (assuming straight-line
depreciation) is £9,000 (£45,000 ÷ 5). The depreciation for the first, partial year is
therefore:
× £9,000 = £5,000
The partial-period calculation is relatively simple when Steeltex uses straight-line
depreciation. But how is partial-period depreciation handled when it uses an accelerated
method such as sum-of-the-years’-digits or double-declining-balance? As an illustration,
assume that Steeltex purchased another machine for £10,000 on July 1, 2022, with an
estimated useful life of five years and no residual value. Illustration 11.11 shows the
depreciation figures for 2022, 2023, and 2024.
6⅔

ILLUSTRATION 11.11 Calculation of Partial-Period Depreciation, Two
Methods
Sometimes a company like Steeltex modifies the process of allocating costs to a partial
period to handle acquisitions and disposals of plant assets more simply. One variation is
to take no depreciation in the year of acquisition and a full year’s depreciation in the year
of disposal. Other variations charge one-half year’s depreciation both in the year of
acquisition and in the year of disposal (referred to as the half-year convention), or
charge a full year in the year of acquisition and none in the year of disposal.
In fact, Steeltex may adopt any one of these several fractional-year policies in allocating
cost to the first and last years of an asset’s life so long as it applies the method
consistently. However, unless otherwise stipulated, companies normally compute
depreciation on the basis of the nearest full month.
Illustration 11.12 shows depreciation allocated under five different fractional-year
policies using the straight-line method on the £45,000 automated drill machine
purchased by Steeltex on June 10, 2022, discussed earlier.

Machine Cost = £45,000
Depreciation Allocated per Period Over 5-Year
Life*
Fractional-Year Policy
1. Nearest fraction of a year.
£5,000a £9,000 £9,000 £9,000 £9,000 £4,000b
2. Nearest full month.
5,250c
3,750d
3. Half year in period of acquisition and
disposal.
4. Full year in period of acquisition,
none in period of disposal.
–0–
5. None in period of acquisition, full
year in period of disposal.
–0–
a6.667/12 × £9,000
b5.333/12 × £9,000
c7/12 × £9,000
d5/12 × £9,000
*Rounded to nearest pound.
ILLUSTRATION 11.12 Fractional-Year Depreciation Policies
Depreciation and Replacement of Property, Plant, and Equipment
A common misconception about depreciation is that it provides funds for the replacement
of property, plant, and equipment. Depreciation is like other expenses in that it reduces
net income. It differs, though, in that it does not involve a current cash outflow.
To illustrate why depreciation does not provide funds for replacement of plant assets,
assume that a business starts operating with plant assets of $500,000 that have a useful
life of five years. The company’s statement of financial position at the beginning of the
period is:
Plant assets $500,000 Equity $500,000
If we assume that the company earns no revenue over the five years, the income
statements are:
 
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Revenue
$
–0–
$
–0–
$
–0–
$
–0–
$
–0–
Depreciation (100,000)
Loss
Total depreciation of the plant assets over the five years is $500,000. The statement of
financial position at the end of the five years therefore is:
Plant asset $ –0– Equity $ –0–

This extreme example illustrates that depreciation in no way provides funds for the
replacement of assets. The funds for the replacement of the assets come from the
revenues (generated through use of the asset). Without the revenues, no income
materializes and no cash inflow results.
Revision of Depreciation Rates
When purchasing a plant asset, companies carefully determine depreciation rates based
on past experience with similar assets and other pertinent information. However, the
provisions for depreciation are only estimates. As a result, IFRS requires that companies
review the estimates for residual value and service life annually and revise them if
needed. [4] Unexpected physical deterioration or unforeseen obsolescence may decrease
the estimated useful life of the asset. Improved maintenance procedures, revision of
operating procedures, or similar developments may prolong the life of the asset beyond
the expected period.6
For example, assume that Nestlé (CHE) purchased machinery with an original cost of
CHF90,000. It estimates a 20-year life with no residual value. However, during year 11,
Nestlé estimates that it will use the machine for an additional 20 years. Its total life,
therefore, will be 30 years instead of 20. Depreciation has been recorded at the rate of 1⁄20
of CHF90,000, or CHF4,500 per year by the straight-line method. On the basis of a 30-
year life, Nestlé should have recorded depreciation as 1⁄30 of CHF90,000, or CHF3,000 per
year. It has therefore overstated depreciation, and understated net income, by CHF1,500
for each of the past 10 years, or a total amount of CHF15,000. Illustration 11.13 shows
this computation.
 
Per Year For 10 Years
Depreciation charged per books (1⁄20 × CHF90,000)
CHF4,500 CHF45,000
Depreciation based on a 30-year life (1⁄30 × CHF90,000)
Excess depreciation charged
CHF1,500 CHF15,000
ILLUSTRATION 11.13 Computation of Accumulated Difference Due to
Revisions
Nestlé should report this change in estimate in the current and prospective
periods. It should not make any changes in previously reported results. And it does not
adjust opening balances nor attempt to “catch up” for prior periods. The reason? Changes
in estimates are a continual and inherent part of any estimation process. Continual
restatement of prior periods would occur for revisions of estimates unless handled
prospectively. Therefore, no entry is made at the time the change in estimate occurs.
Charges for depreciation in subsequent periods (assuming use of the straight-line
method) are determined by dividing the remaining book value less any residual
value by the remaining estimated life (see Illustration 11.14).

Machinery
CHF90,000
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Book value of machinery at end of 10th year
CHF45,000
Depreciation (future periods) = CHF45,000 book value ÷ 20 years remaining life =
CHF2,250
ILLUSTRATION 11.14 Computing Depreciation after Revision of Estimated
Life
The entry to record depreciation for each of the remaining 20 years is:
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery  
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Depreciation Choices
The amount of depreciation expense recorded depends on both the depreciation
method used and estimates of service lives and residual values of the assets.
Differences in these choices and estimates can significantly impact a company’s
reported results and can make it difficult to compare the depreciation numbers of
different companies.
For example, Veolia Environment (FRA) provided information regarding useful
lives of its assets in the note to its financial statements, as shown to the right.
With the information provided, an analyst determines the impact of these
management choices and judgments on the amount of depreciation expense for
classes of property, plant, and equipment.
7.3 Property, Plant, and Equipment
Property, plant, and equipment are recorded at historical acquisition cost to the
Group, less accumulated depreciation and any accumulated impairment losses.
Property, plant, and equipment are recorded by component, with each component
depreciated over its useful life.
Useful lives are as follows:
Range of Useful Lives in Number of Years*
Buildings
20 to 50
Technical systems
7 to 35
Vehicles
3 to 25
Other plant and equipment
3 to 12
*The range of useful lives is due to the diversity of property, plant, and equipment concerned.

Impairments
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Explain the accounting issues related to asset impairment.
The general accounting standard of lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value for
inventories does not apply to property, plant, and equipment. Even when
property, plant, and equipment has suffered partial obsolescence, accountants have been
reluctant to reduce the asset’s carrying amount. Why? Because, unlike inventories, it is
difficult to arrive at a fair value for property, plant, and equipment that is not somewhat
subjective and arbitrary.
For example, Falconbridge Ltd. Nickel Mines (CAN) had to decide whether to write
off all or a part of its property, plant, and equipment in a nickel-mining operation in the
Dominican Republic. The project had been incurring losses because nickel prices were low
and operating costs were high. Only if nickel prices increased by approximately 33 percent
would the project be reasonably profitable. Whether a write-off was appropriate depended
on the future price of nickel. Even if the company decided to write off the asset, how
much should be written off?
Recognizing Impairments
As discussed in the opening story, rapid change is common in the electronics and
computer industries. When these changes occur, companies in these industries may need
to write off or write down their long-lived assets. These write-offs are referred to as
impairments.
A long-lived tangible asset is impaired when a company is not able to recover the asset’s
carrying amount either through using it or by selling it. To determine whether an asset is
impaired, companies annually review the asset for indicators of impairments—
that is, a decline in the asset’s cash-generating ability through use or sale. This review
should consider internal sources (e.g., adverse changes in performance) and external
sources (e.g., adverse changes in the business or regulatory environment) of information.
If impairment indicators are present, then an impairment test must be
conducted. This test compares the asset’s recoverable amount with its carrying amount
(see Underlying Concepts). If the carrying amount is higher than the recoverable
amount, the difference is an impairment loss. If the recoverable amount is greater than
the carrying amount, no impairment is recorded. [5]
Underlying Concepts
IFRS uses the terms carrying value, carrying amount, and book value
interchangeably.
Recoverable amount is defined as the higher of fair value less costs to sell or value-in-
use. Fair value less costs to sell means what the asset could be sold for after deducting
costs of disposal. Value-in-use is the present value of net cash flows expected from the

future use and eventual sale of the asset at the end of its useful life. Illustration 11.15
highlights the nature of the impairment test.
ILLUSTRATION 11.15 Impairment Test
If either the fair value less costs to sell or value-in-use is higher than the carrying amount,
there is no impairment. If both the fair value less costs to sell and value-in-use are lower
than the carrying amount, a loss on impairment occurs.
Example: No Impairment
Assume that Cruz SA performs an impairment test for its equipment. The carrying
amount of Cruz’s equipment is €200,000, its fair value less costs to sell is €180,000, and
its value-in-use is €205,000. In this case, the value-in-use of Cruz’s equipment is higher
than its carrying amount of €200,000. As a result, there is no impairment.7
Example: Impairment
Assume the same information for Cruz SA above except that the value-in-use of Cruz’s
equipment is €175,000 rather than €205,000. Cruz measures the impairment loss as the
difference between the carrying amount of €200,000 and the higher of fair value less
costs to sell (€180,000) or value-in-use (€175,000). Cruz therefore uses the fair value less
cost of disposal to record an impairment loss of €20,000 (€200,000 − €180,000).
Cruz makes the following entry to record the impairment loss.
Loss on Impairment
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment  
The Loss on Impairment is reported in the income statement in the “Other income and
expense” section. The company then either credits Equipment or Accumulated
Depreciation—Equipment to reduce the carrying amount of the equipment for the
impairment. For purposes of homework, credit Accumulated Depreciation when
recording an impairment for a depreciable asset.
Impairment Illustrations
Additional examples of impairment follow.

Case 1: At December 31, 2023, Hanoi Ltd. has equipment with a cost of VND26,000,000,
and accumulated depreciation of VND12,000,000, after the current yearʼs depreciation
has been recorded. The equipment has a total useful life of four years with a residual
value of VND2,000,000. The following information relates to this equipment.
1. The equipment’s carrying amount at December 31, 2023, is VND14,000,000
(VND26,000,000 − VND12,000,000).
2. Hanoi uses straight-line depreciation. Hanoi’s depreciation was VND6,000,000
[(VND26,000,000 − VND2,000,000) ÷ 4] for 2023 and has been recorded.
3. Hanoi has determined that the recoverable amount for this asset at December 31,
2023, is VND11,000,000.
4. The remaining useful life of the equipment after December 31, 2023, is two years.
Hanoi records the impairment on its equipment at December 31, 2023, as follows.
Loss on Impairment (VND14,000,000 − VND11,000,000) 3,000,000  
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
 
Following the recognition of the impairment loss in 2023, the carrying amount of the
equipment is now VND11,000,000 (VND14,000,000 − VND3,000,000). For 2024, Hanoi
determines that the equipment’s total useful life has not changed (thus, the equipment’s
remaining useful life is still two years). However, the estimated residual value of the
equipment is now zero. Hanoi continues to use straight-line depreciation and makes the
following journal entry to record depreciation for 2024.
Depreciation Expense (VND11,000,000 ÷ 2) 5,500,000  
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
 
Hanoi records depreciation in the periods following the impairment using the carrying
amount of the asset adjusted for the impairment. Hanoi then evaluates whether the
equipment was further impaired at the end of 2024. For example, the carrying amount of
Hanoi’s equipment at December 31, 2024, is VND5,500,000 (VND26,000,000 −
VND12,000,000 − VND3,000,000 − VND5,500,000). If Hanoi determines that the
recoverable amount at December 31, 2024, is lower than VND5,500,000, then an
additional impairment loss is recorded.
Case 2
At the end of 2022, Verma Company tests a machine for impairment. The machine has a
carrying amount of $200,000. It has an estimated remaining useful life of five years.
Because of the unique nature of the machine, there is little market-related information on
which to base a recoverable amount based on fair value. As a result, Verma determines
that the machine’s recoverable amount (i.e., the higher of value-in-use and fair value less
costs to sell) should be based on value-in-use.
To determine value-in-use, Verma develops an estimate of net future cash flows based on
internal company cash budgets (and reflecting cash inflows from the machine and
estimated costs necessary to maintain the machine in its current condition). [7] Verma

uses a discount rate of 8 percent, which should be a pretax rate that approximates
Verma’s cost of borrowing.8 Verma’s analysis indicates that its future cash flows will be
$40,000 each year for five years, and it will receive a residual value of $10,000 at the end
of the five years. It is assumed that all cash flows occur at the end of the year. The
computation of the value-in-use for Verma’s machine is shown in Illustration 11.16.
Present value of 5 annual payments of $40,000 ($40,000 × 3.99271, Table
Present value of residual value of $10,000 ($10,000 × .68058, Table 6.1)
Value-in-use related to machine
ILLUSTRATION 11.16 Value-in-Use Computation
The computation of the impairment loss on the machine at the end of 2022 is shown in
Illustration 11.17.
Carrying amount of machine before impairment loss $200,000.00
Recoverable amount of machine
Loss on impairment
ILLUSTRATION 11.17 Impairment Loss Calculation Based on Value-in-Use
The company therefore records an impairment loss at December 31, 2022, as follows.
Loss on Impairment
Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery  
The carrying amount of the machine after recording the loss is $166,514.20.
Reversal of Impairment Loss
After recording the impairment loss, the recoverable amount becomes the basis of the
impaired asset. What happens if a review in a future year indicates that the asset is no
longer impaired because the recoverable amount of the asset is higher than the carrying
amount? In that case, the impairment loss may be reversed.
To illustrate, assume that Tan Group purchases equipment on January 1, 2022, for
HK$300,000, with a useful life of three years and no residual value. Its depreciation and
related carrying amount over the three years is as follows.
Year
Depreciation Expense
Carrying Amount
2022 HK$100,000 (HK$300,000 ÷ 3)
HK$200,000
2023 HK$100,000 (HK$300,000 ÷ 3)
HK$100,000
2024 HK$100,000 (HK$300,000 ÷ 3)
At December 31, 2022, Tan determines it has an impairment loss of HK$20,000 and
therefore makes the following entry.
Loss on Impairment

Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment  
Tan’s depreciation expense and related carrying amount after the impairment is as
indicated below.
Year
Depreciation Expense
Carrying Amount
2023 HK$90,000 (HK$180,000 ÷ 2)
HK$90,000
2024 HK$90,000 (HK$180,000 ÷ 2)
At the end of 2023, Tan determines that the recoverable amount of the equipment is
HK$96,000, which is greater than its carrying amount of HK$90,000. In this case, Tan
reverses a portion of the previously recognized impairment loss with the following entry.
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment 6,000  
Recovery of Impairment Loss
 
The recovery of the impairment loss is reported in the “Other income and expense”
section of the income statement. The carrying amount of Tan’s equipment is now
HK$96,000 (HK$90,000 + HK$6,000) at December 31, 2023.
The general rule related to reversals of impairments is as follows. The amount of the
recovery of the loss is limited to the carrying amount that would result if the impairment
had not occurred. For example, the carrying amount of Tan’s equipment at the end of
2023 would be HK$100,000, assuming no impairment. The HK$6,000 recovery is
therefore permitted because Tan’s carrying amount on the equipment is now only
HK$96,000. However, any recovery above HK$10,000 is not permitted. The reason is that
any recovery above HK$10,000 results in Tan carrying the asset at a value above its
historical cost.
Cash-Generating Units
In some cases, it may not be possible to assess a single asset for impairment because the
single asset generates cash flows only in combination with other assets. In that case,
companies should identify the smallest group of assets that can be identified that
generates cash flows independently of the cash flows from other assets. Such a group is
called a cash-generating unit (CGU).
For example, Santos SpA is reviewing its plant assets for indicators of impairment.
However, it is finding that identifying cash flows for individual assets is very cumbersome
and inaccurate because the cash flows related to a group of assets are interdependent.
This situation can arise if Santos has one operating unit (machining division) that
manufactures products that are transferred to another Santos business unit (packing
division), which then markets the products to end customers. Because the cash flows to
the assets in the machining division are dependent on the cash flows in the packing
division, Santos should evaluate both divisions together as a cash-generating unit in its
impairment assessments.
Impairment of Assets to Be Disposed Of

What happens if a company intends to dispose of the impaired asset, instead of holding it
for use? Recently, Kroger (USA) recorded an impairment loss of $54 million on property,
plant, and equipment it no longer needed due to store closures. In this case, Kroger
reports the impaired asset at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (fair value less
costs to sell). Because Kroger intends to dispose of the assets in a short period of time, it
uses net realizable value in order to provide a better measure of the net cash flows that it
will receive from these assets.
Kroger does not depreciate or amortize assets held for disposal during the period it holds
them. The rationale is that depreciation is inconsistent with both the notion of assets to
be disposed of, and with the use of the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value. In other
words, assets held for disposal are like inventory; companies should report
them at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value.
Because Kroger will recover assets held for disposal through sale rather than through
operations, it continually revalues them. Each period, the assets are reported at the lower-
of-cost-or-net realizable value. Thus, Kroger can write up or down an asset held for
disposal in future periods, as long as the carrying amount after the write-up
never exceeds the carrying amount of the asset before the impairment.
Companies should report losses or gains related to these impaired assets as part of
operating income in “Other income and expense.”
Illustration 11.18 summarizes the key concepts in accounting for impairments.

ILLUSTRATION 11.18 Graphic of Accounting for Impairments
Depletion
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Discuss the accounting procedures for depletion of mineral resources.
Natural resources, often called wasting assets, include petroleum, minerals, and
timberlands. Natural resources can be further subdivided into two categories: (1)
biological assets such as timberlands, and (2) mineral resources such as oil, gas, and
mineral mining. The accounting and reporting requirements for biological assets such as
timberlands use a fair value approach and are discussed in Chapter 9. Here, we focus on
mineral resources, which have two main features: (1) the complete removal
(consumption) of the asset, and (2) replacement of the asset only by an act of nature.
Unlike plant and equipment, mineral resources are consumed physically over the period
of use and do not maintain their physical characteristics. Still, the accounting problems
associated with these resources are similar to those encountered with property, plant, and
equipment. The questions to be answered are:

1. How do companies establish the cost basis for write-off?
2. What pattern of allocation should companies employ?
Recall that the accounting profession uses the term depletion for the process of
allocating the cost of mineral resources to expense.
Establishing a Depletion Base
How do we determine the depletion base for mineral resources? For example, a company
like Total SA (FRA) makes sizable expenditures to find mineral resources. And, for every
successful discovery, there are many failures. Furthermore, the company often
encounters long delays between the time it incurs costs and the time it obtains the
benefits from the extracted resources. As a result, a company in the extractive industries,
like Total SA, frequently adopts a conservative policy in accounting for the expenditures
related to finding and extracting mineral resources.
Computation of the depletion base involves properly accounting for three types of
expenditures:
1. Pre-exploratory costs.
2. Exploratory and evaluation costs.
3. Development costs.
Pre-Exploratory Costs
Pre-exploratory expenditures are costs incurred before the company has obtained the
legal rights to explore a specific area. For example, Royal Dutch Shell (GBR and NLD)
may perform seismic testing of possible oil-drilling sites before incurring any substantial
costs of exploration. These costs (often referred to as prospecting costs) are generally
considered speculative in nature and are expensed as incurred.
Exploratory and Evaluation (E&E) Costs
Examples of some types of exploratory and evaluation (E&E) costs are as follows.
Acquisition of rights to explore.
Topographical, geological, geochemical, and geophysical studies.
Exploratory drilling.
Sampling.
Activities in relation to evaluating the technical feasibility and commercial viability of
extracting a mineral resource.
Companies have a choice regarding E&E costs. They can either write off these costs as
incurred or capitalize these costs pending evaluation. IFRS therefore provides companies
with flexibility as how to account for E&E costs at inception. [9]
The reason for the flexibility is that the accounting for these types of expenditures is
controversial. To illustrate, assume that Royal Dutch Shell is exploring for oil and

determines that the area of exploration has oil reserves. It therefore drills a well to
determine the amount of the reserves. Unfortunately, the well drilled results in a dry
hole; that is, no reserves are found. Shell then drills more wells and finds some oil
reserves, but some others are dry holes. The question is: Should the cost of the dry holes
be capitalized? Or should only the cost of the wells that find reserves be capitalized?
Those who hold the full-cost concept (full capitalization) argue that the cost of drilling
a dry hole is a cost needed to find the commercially profitable wells. Others believe that
companies should capitalize only the costs of the successful wells. This is the
successful-efforts concept. Its proponents believe that the only relevant measure for a
project is the cost directly related to that project, and that companies should report any
remaining costs as period charges. In addition, they argue that an unsuccessful company
will end up capitalizing many costs that will make it, over a short period of time, show no
less income than does one that is successful.
Development Costs
Once technical feasibility and commercial viability of production are demonstrated, E&E
assets are reclassified as development costs. Generally, the development phase occurs
when the company has determined that it has a reasonable level of mineral resources in
the ground so that production will be profitable. At this time, any E&E assets recognized
as assets are subsequently tested for impairment, to ensure that these assets are not
carried at an amount above their recoverable amount.
Companies divide development costs into two parts: (1) tangible equipment costs and
(2) intangible development costs. Tangible equipment costs include all of the
transportation and other heavy equipment needed to extract the resource and get it ready
for market. Because companies can move the heavy equipment from one extracting site to
another, companies do not normally include tangible equipment costs in the
depletion base. Instead, they use separate depreciation charges to allocate the costs of
such equipment. However, some tangible assets (e.g., a drilling rig foundation) cannot be
moved. Companies depreciate these assets over their useful life or the life of the resource,
whichever is shorter.
Intangible development costs, on the other hand, are such items as drilling costs, tunnels,
shafts, and wells. These costs have no tangible characteristics but are needed for the
production of the mineral resource. Intangible development costs are considered
part of the depletion base.
Companies sometimes incur substantial costs to restore property to its natural state after
extraction has occurred. These are restoration costs. Companies consider restoration
costs part of the depletion base. The amount included in the depletion base is the fair
value of the obligation to restore the property after extraction. A more complete
discussion of the accounting for restoration costs and related liabilities (sometimes
referred to as environmental liability provisions) is provided in Chapter 13. Similar to
other long-lived assets, companies deduct from the depletion base any residual value to be
received on the property.
Write-Off of Resource Cost

Once the company establishes the depletion base, the next problem is determining how to
allocate the cost of the mineral resource to accounting periods.
Normally, companies compute depletion (often referred to as cost depletion) using a
units-of-production method (an activity approach). Thus, depletion is a function of
the number of units extracted during the period. In this approach, the total cost of the
mineral resource less residual value is divided by the number of units estimated to be in
the resource deposit, to obtain a cost per unit of product. To compute depletion, the
cost per unit is then multiplied by the number of units extracted.
For example, MaClede SA acquired the right to use 1,000 acres of land in South Africa to
mine for silver. The lease cost is €50,000, and the related exploration costs on the
property are €100,000. Intangible development costs incurred in opening the mine are
€850,000. Total costs related to the mine before the first ounce of silver is extracted are,
therefore, €1,000,000. MaClede estimates that the mine will provide approximately
100,000 ounces of silver. Illustration 11.19 shows computation of the depletion cost per
unit (depletion rate).
= Depletion Cost per Unit
= €10 per ounce
ILLUSTRATION 11.19 Computation of Depletion Rate
If MaClede extracts 25,000 ounces in the first year, then the depletion for the year is
€250,000 (25,000 ounces × €10). It records the depletion as follows.
Inventory
Accumulated Depletion  
MaClede debits Inventory for the total depletion for the year and credits Accumulated
Depletion to reduce the carrying amount of the mineral resource. MaClede credits
Inventory when it sells the inventory. The amount not sold remains in inventory and is
reported in the current assets section of the statement of financial position.
Sometimes companies do not use an Accumulated Depletion account. In that case, the
credit goes directly to the mineral resources asset account. MaClede’s statement of
financial position would present the cost of the mineral resource and the amount of
accumulated depletion entered to date as shown in Illustration 11.20.
Silver mine (at cost)
Less: Accumulated depletion
ILLUSTRATION 11.20 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of
Mineral Resource
In the income statement, the depletion cost related to the inventory sold is part of the cost
of goods sold.
Total Cost  − Residual Value
Total Estimated Units Available

MaClede may also depreciate on a units-of-production basis the tangible equipment used
in extracting the silver. This approach is appropriate if it can directly assign the estimated
lives of the equipment to one given resource deposit. If MaClede uses the equipment on
more than one job, other cost allocation methods such as straight-line or accelerated
depreciation methods would be more appropriate.
Estimating Recoverable Reserves
Sometimes companies need to change the estimate of recoverable reserves. They do so
either because they have new information or because more sophisticated production
processes are available. Mineral resources such as oil and gas deposits and some rare
metals present the greatest challenges. Estimates of these reserves are in large measure
merely “knowledgeable guesses.”9
This problem is the same as accounting for changes in estimates for the useful
lives of plant and equipment. The procedure is to revise the depletion rate on a
prospective basis: A company divides the remaining cost by the new estimate of the
recoverable reserves. This approach has much merit because the required estimates are so
uncertain.
Liquidating Dividends
A company often owns as its only major asset a property from which it intends to extract
mineral resources. If the company does not expect to purchase additional properties, it
may gradually distribute to shareholders their capital investments by paying liquidating
dividends, which are dividends greater than the amount of accumulated net income.
The major accounting problem is to distinguish between dividends that are a return of
capital and those that are not. Because the dividend is a return of the investor’s original
contribution, the company issuing a liquidating dividend should debit Share Premium—
Ordinary for that portion related to the original investment, instead of debiting Retained
Earnings.
To illustrate, at year-end, Callahan Mining had a retained earnings balance of £1,650,000,
accumulated depletion on mineral properties of £2,100,000, and share premium of
£5,435,493. Callahan’s board declared a dividend of £3 per share on the 1,000,000 shares
outstanding. It records the £3,000,000 cash dividend as follows.
Retained Earnings
Share Premium—Ordinary 1,350,000  
Cash
 
Callahan must inform shareholders that the £3 dividend per share represents a £1.65
(£1,650,000 ÷ 1,000,000 shares) per share return on investment and a £1.35 (£1,350,000
÷ 1,000,000 shares) per share liquidating dividend.
Presentation on the Financial Statements
Companies should disclose the following related to E&E expenditures.

1. The accounting policies for exploration and evaluation expenditures, including the
recognition of E&E assets.
2. The amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expense, and operating cash flow
arising from the exploration for and evaluation of mineral resources.
The financial statement excerpts for Tullow Oil plc (GBR) in Illustration 11.21
highlight the nature of these disclosures.

Tullow Oil plc
(in millions)
Income Statement
 
Exploration costs written off
Statement of Financial Position
 
Intangible exploration and evaluation assets
Statement of Cash Flows
 
Purchase of intangible exploration and evaluation of assets
Accounting Policies
(k) Exploration, evaluation, and production assets
The Group adopts the successful efforts method of accounting for exploration and
appraisal costs. All license acquisition, exploration, and evaluation costs are initially
capitalized in cost centers by well, field, or exploration area, as appropriate. Directly
attributable administration costs and interest payable are capitalized insofar as they
relate to specific development activities. Pre-license costs are expensed in the period in
which they are incurred. These costs are then written off as exploration costs in the
Income Statement unless commercial reserves have been established or the
determination process has not been completed and there are no indications of
impairment. All field development costs are capitalized as property, plant, and
equipment. Property, plant, and equipment related to production activities are amortized
in accordance with the Group’s depletion and amortization accounting policy.
(m) Depletion and amortization—discovery fields
All expenditure carried within each field is amortized from the commencement of
production on a unit of production basis, which is the ratio of oil and gas production in
the period to the estimated quantities of commercial reserves at the end of the period
plus the production in the period, generally on a field-by-field basis. Costs used in the
unit of production calculation comprise the net book value of capitalized costs plus the
estimated future field development costs. Changes in the estimates of commercial
reserves or future field development costs are dealt with prospectively.
(n) Impairment of property, plant and equipment
Where there has been a change in economic conditions that indicates a possible
impairment in a discovery field, the recoverability of the net book value relating to that
field is assessed by comparison with the estimated discounted cash flows based on
management’s expectations of future oil and gas prices and future costs.
ILLUSTRATION 11.21 Reporting of Exploration Costs

Revaluations
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Apply the accounting for revaluations.
Up to this point, we have assumed that companies use the historical cost principle to
value long-lived tangible assets after acquisition. However, companies have a choice: They
may value these assets at cost or at fair value. [10]
Recognizing Revaluations
Network Rail (GBR) is an example of a company that elected to use fair values to
account for assets in its railroad network. Its use of fair value led to an increase of £4,289
million to its long-lived tangible assets. When companies choose to report at fair value
their long-lived tangible assets subsequent to acquisition, they account for the change in
the fair value by adjusting the appropriate asset account and establishing an unrealized
gain on the revalued long-lived tangible asset. This unrealized gain is often referred to as
revaluation surplus.
Revaluation—Land
To illustrate revaluation of land, assume that Siemens Group (DEU) purchased land for
€1,000,000 on January 5, 2022. The company elects to use revaluation accounting for the
land in subsequent periods. At December 31, 2022, the land’s fair value is €1,200,000. The
entry to record the land at fair value is as follows.
Land
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land  
The land is reported on the statement of financial position at €1,200,000, and the
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land increases other comprehensive income in the
statement of comprehensive income. In addition, if this is the only revaluation
adjustment to date, the statement of financial position reports accumulated other
comprehensive income of €200,000.
Revaluation—Depreciable Assets
To illustrate the accounting for revaluations of depreciable assets, assume that Lenovo
Group (CHN) purchases equipment for ¥500,000 on January 2, 2022. The equipment
has a useful life of five years, is depreciated using the straight-line method of
depreciation, and has a residual value of zero. Lenovo chooses to revalue its equipment to
fair value over the life of the equipment. Lenovo records depreciation expense of
¥100,000 (¥500,000 ÷ 5) at December 31, 2022, as follows.
December 31, 2022
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
 
(To record depreciation expense in 2022)  
 

After this entry, Lenovo’s equipment has a carrying amount of ¥400,000 (¥500,000 −
¥100,000). Lenovo receives an independent appraisal for the fair value of equipment at
December 31, 2022, which is ¥460,000. To report the equipment at fair value, Lenovo
does the following.
1. Reduces the Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment account to zero.
2. Reduces the Equipment account by ¥40,000—it then is reported at its fair value of
¥460,000.
3. Records Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment for the difference between the
fair value and carrying amount of the equipment, or ¥60,000 (¥460,000 −
¥400,000). The entry to record this revaluation at December 31, 2022, is as follows.
December 31, 2022
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Equipment
 
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment
 
(To adjust the equipment to fair value and record revaluation
increase)
 
 
The equipment is now reported at its fair value of ¥460,000 (¥500,000 − ¥40,000).10 The
increase in the fair value of ¥60,000 is reported on the statement of comprehensive
income as other comprehensive income. In addition, the ending balance is reported in
accumulated other comprehensive income on the statement of financial position in the
equity section.
Illustration 11.22 shows the presentation of revaluation elements.
Statement of Comprehensive Income
Other comprehensive income
Unrealized gain on revaluation—equipment
¥ 60,000
Statement of Financial Position
Non-current assets
Equipment (¥500,000 − ¥40,000)
¥460,000
Accumulated depreciation—equipment (¥100,000 − ¥100,000)
–0–
Carrying amount
¥460,000
Equity
Accumulated other comprehensive income
¥ 60,000
ILLUSTRATION 11.22 Financial Statement Presentation—Revaluations
As indicated, at December 31, 2022, the carrying amount of the equipment is now
¥460,000. Lenovo reports depreciation expense of ¥100,000 in the income statement and
an Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment of ¥60,000 in “Other comprehensive

income.” Assuming no change in the useful life of the equipment, depreciation in 2022 is
¥115,000 (¥460,000 ÷ 4).
In summary, a revaluation increase generally goes to equity. A revaluation decrease is
reported as an expense (as an impairment loss), unless it offsets previously recorded
revaluation increases. If the revaluation increase offsets a revaluation decrease that went
to expense, then the increase is reported in income. Under no circumstances can the
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income account related to revaluations
have a negative balance.
Revaluation Issues
The use of revaluation accounting is not an “all or nothing” proposition. That is, a
company can select to value only one class of assets, say buildings, and not revalue other
assets such as land or equipment. However, if a company selects only buildings,
revaluation applies to all assets in that class of assets. A class of assets is a grouping of
items that have a similar nature and use in a company’s operations. For example, a
company such as Siemens (DEU) may have the following classes of assets: land,
equipment, and buildings. If Siemens chooses to fair value its land class, it must fair value
all land. It cannot selectively apply revaluation accounting to certain parcels of land
within the class and report them at fair value and keep the remainder at historical cost. To
permit such “cherry-picking” not only leads to a misleading mixture of historical cost and
fair value, but also permits a company to maximize its fair value through selective
revaluation.
Companies using revaluation accounting must also make every effort to keep the assets’
values up to date. Assets that are experiencing rapid price changes must be revalued on an
annual basis. Otherwise, less frequent revaluation is acceptable. The fair value of items of
property, plant, and equipment is usually determined by appraisal. Appendix 11A
illustrates the accounting for revaluations in more detail both for land and depreciable
assets.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
To Revalue or Not
Most companies do not use revaluation accounting. A major reason is the substantial
and continuing costs associated with appraisals to determine fair value. In addition,
the gains associated with revaluations above historical cost are not reported in net
income but instead go directly to equity. On the other hand, losses associated with
revaluations below historical cost decrease net income. In addition, for depreciable
assets, the higher depreciation charges related to the revalued assets also reduce net
income.
However, in the hospitality or hotel industry, it is fairly common to encounter the use
of revaluation accounting. For example, consider Hotel Royal Limited (SGP),
which owns the Hotel Royal in Singapore as well as manages and invests in hotel
properties in Malaysia and New Zealand. In its annual report, the company provided
the following description of its accounting policies related to property, plant, and
equipment:
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation
and any accumulated impairment losses except for freehold land on which
certain hotels are sited, which are stated at revalued amounts. Revaluations of
freehold hotel land is performed with sufficient regularity such that the carrying
amounts do not differ materially from those which would be determined using
fair values at the end of the reporting period.
During the most recent period, the company reported total assets of S$807,393,000.
Of the total amount, property, plant, and equipment was S$647,679,000, or 80
percent of total assets. In the footnotes for the period the company reported that
freehold land, which was reported at a fair value of S$502,556,000, had a cost of
S$73,100,000. The difference in these two amounts (S$429,456,000) is over one-half
of the total assets of the company. Said another way, if the company did not use the
revaluation method, it would have underreported its assets by over 100 percent.
In industries and settings such as this, the added cost of revaluation accounting really
does make sense!
Presentation and Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Demonstrate how to report and analyze property, plant, equipment, and mineral
resources.
Presentation of Property, Plant, Equipment, and Mineral Resources

A company should disclose the basis of valuation—usually historical cost—for property,
plant, equipment, and mineral resources along with pledges, liens, and other
commitments related to these assets. It should not offset any liability secured by property,
plant, equipment, and mineral resources against these assets. Instead, this obligation
should be reported in the liabilities section. The company should segregate property,
plant, and equipment not currently employed as producing assets in the business (such as
idle facilities or land held as an investment) from assets used in operations.
When depreciating assets, a company credits a valuation account, normally called
Accumulated Depreciation. Using an accumulated depreciation account permits the user
of the financial statements to see the original cost of the asset and the amount of
depreciation that the company charged to expense in past years.
When depleting mineral resources, some companies use an accumulated depletion
account. Many, however, simply credit the mineral resource account directly. The
rationale for this approach is that the mineral resources are physically consumed, making
direct reduction of the cost of the mineral resources appropriate.
Illustration 11.23 provides the reporting of property, plant, and equipment by Nestlé
Group (CHE) in a recent annual report. Nestlé presents condensed statement of financial
position data, supplemented with detail amounts and accounting policies provided in the
notes to the financial statements.

Nestlé Group
(in millions of CHF)
Non-current assets
Property, plant, and equipment
Note 1 Accounting Policies
Property, plant, and equipment
Property, plant, and equipment are shown in the balance sheet at their historical cost.
Depreciation is provided on components that have homogeneous useful lives by using
the straight-line method so as to depreciate the initial cost down to the residual value
over the estimated useful lives. The residual values are 30% on head offices and nil for
all other asset types. The useful lives are as follows:
Buildings
20–40 years
Machinery and equipment
10–25 years
Tools, furniture, information technology, and
sundry equipment
3–10 years
Vehicles
3–8 years
Land is not depreciated.
Useful lives, components, and residual amounts are reviewed annually. Such a review
takes into consideration the nature of the assets, their intended use including but not
limited to the closure of facilities, and the evolution of the technology and competitive
pressures that may lead to technical obsolescence.
Depreciation of property, plant, and equipment is allocated to the appropriate headings
of expenses by function in the income statement.
Borrowing costs incurred during the course of construction are capitalized if the assets
under construction are significant and if their construction requires a substantial period
to complete (typically more than one year). The capitalization rate is determined on the
basis of the short-term borrowing rate for the period of construction. Premiums
capitalized for leasehold land or buildings are amortized over the length of the lease.
Government grants are recognized in accordance with the deferral method, whereby the
grant is set up as deferred income which is released to the income statement over the
useful life of the related assets. Grants that are not related to assets are credited to the
income statement when they are received.
Gross value
Land and
Buildings
Machinery
and
Equipment
Tools, Furniture,
and Other
Equipment
Vehicles
Total
At 1 January
Currency retranslations

Capital expenditure
Disposals
Reclassified (to)/from
held for sale
Modification of the
scope of consolidation
—
At 31 December
Accumulated
depreciation and
impairments
 
 
 
 
 
At 1 January
Currency retranslations
Depreciation
Impairments
Disposals
Reclassified (to)/from
held for sale
Modification of the
scope of consolidation
At 31 December
Net at 31 December
At December 31, property, plant and equipment include CHF1,528 million of assets
under construction. Net property, plant, and equipment of CHF208 million are pledged
as security for financial liabilities.
Impairment
Impairment of property, plant, and equipment arises mainly from the plans to optimise
industrial manufacturing capacities by closing or selling inefficient production facilities.
Commitments for expenditure
At December 31, the Group was committed to expenditure amounting to CHF797 million.
ILLUSTRATION 11.23 Disclosures for Property, Plant, and Equipment
Analysis of Property, Plant, and Equipment
Analysts evaluate assets relative to activity (turnover) and profitability.
Asset Turnover
How efficiently a company uses its assets to generate sales is measured by the asset
turnover. This ratio divides net sales by average total assets for the period. The resulting

number is the dollars of sales produced by each dollar invested in assets. To illustrate, we
use the following data from Siemens Group’s (DEU) 2018 annual report.
Siemens Group
(in millions)
Net sales
Total assets, 9/30/18
Total assets, 9/30/17
Net income
Illustration 11.24 shows computation of the asset turnover.
Asset Turnover =
=
= 0.60
ILLUSTRATION 11.24 Asset Turnover
The asset turnover shows that Siemens generated sales of €0.60 per euro of assets in the
year ended September 30, 2018.
Asset turnovers vary considerably among industries. For example, a large utility like
Ameren (USA) has a ratio of 0.32 times. A large grocery chain like Morrisons (GBR)
has a ratio of 1.86 times. Thus, in comparing performance among companies based on the
asset turnover, you need to consider the ratio within the context of the industry in which
a company operates.
Profit Margin on Sales
Another measure for analyzing the use of property, plant, and equipment is the profit
margin on sales (return on sales). Calculated as net income divided by net sales, this
profitability ratio does not, by itself, answer the question of how profitably a company
uses its assets. But by relating the profit margin on sales to the asset turnover during a
period of time, we can ascertain how profitably the company used assets during that
period of time in a measure of the return on assets. Using the Siemens data, we compute
the profit margin on sales and the return on assets as shown in Illustration 11.25.
Net Sales
Average Total Assets
(€138,915 + €136,111) ÷ 2

Profit Margin on Sales =
=
= 7.4%
Return on Assets = Profit Margin on Sales ×
Asset Turnover
= .074 × 0.60
= 4.4%
ILLUSTRATION 11.25 Profit Margin on Sales
Return on Assets
The rate of return a company achieves through use of its assets is the return on assets
(ROA). Rather than using the profit margin on sales, we can compute it directly by
dividing net income by average total assets. Using Siemens’ data, we compute the ratio as
shown in Illustration 11.26.
Return on Assets =
=
= 4.4%
ILLUSTRATION 11.26 Return on Assets
The 4.4 percent rate of return computed in this manner equals the 4.4 percent rate
computed by multiplying the profit margin on sales by the asset turnover. The return on
assets measures profitability well because it combines the effects of profit margin and
asset turnover.
APPENDIX 11A
Revaluation of Property, Plant, and Equipment
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *7
Illustrate revaluation accounting procedures.
As indicated in Chapter 11, companies can use revaluation accounting subsequent to
acquisition. When companies choose to report at fair value their long-lived tangible assets
subsequent to acquisition, they account for the change in the fair value by adjusting the
appropriate asset account and recording an unrealized gain on the revalued long-lived
Net Income
Net Sales
Net Income
Average Total Assets
(€138,915 + €136,111) ÷ 2

tangible asset. This unrealized gain is often referred to as revaluation surplus and
reported as part of other comprehensive income.
The general rules for revaluation accounting are as follows.
1. When a company revalues its long-lived tangible assets above historical cost, it
reports an unrealized gain that increases other comprehensive income. Thus, the
unrealized gain bypasses net income, increases other comprehensive income, and
increases accumulated other comprehensive income.
2. If a company experiences a loss on impairment (decrease of value below historical
cost), the loss reduces net income and retained earnings. Thus, gains on revaluation
increase equity but not net income, whereas losses decrease net income and retained
earnings (and therefore equity).
3. If a revaluation increase reverses a decrease that was previously reported as an
impairment loss, a company credits the revaluation increase to net income using the
account Recovery of Impairment Loss up to the amount of the prior loss. Any
additional valuation increase above historical cost increases other comprehensive
income and is credited to Unrealized Gain on Revaluation.
4. If a revaluation decrease reverses an increase that was reported as an unrealized gain,
a company first reduces other comprehensive income by eliminating the unrealized
gain. Any additional valuation decrease reduces net income and is reported as a loss
on impairment.
In the following two sections, we explain revaluation procedures for land and depreciable
assets in a multiple-year setting.
Revaluation of Land
Revaluation—2022: Valuation Increase
To illustrate the accounting for a revaluation, assume that Unilever Group (GBR and
NLD) purchased land on January 1, 2022, that cost €400,000. Unilever decides to report
the land at fair value in subsequent periods. At December 31, 2022, an appraisal of the
land indicates that its fair value is €520,000. Unilever makes the following entry to record
the increase in fair value.
December 31, 2022
Land
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land (€520,000 − €400,000)  
(To recognize increase in land value)
 
 
Illustration 11A.1 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Unilever in

Date
Item
Land Fair
Value
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income (AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€0
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.1 Summary of Revaluation—2022
The land is now reported at its fair value of €520,000. The increase in the fair value of
€120,000 is reported on the statement of comprehensive income as other comprehensive
income. In addition, the ending balance in Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land is
reported as accumulated other comprehensive income in the statement of financial
position in the equity section.
Revaluation—2023: Decrease Below Historical Cost
What happens if the land’s fair value at December 31, 2023, is €380,000, a decrease of
€140,000 (€520,000 − €380,000)? In this case, the land’s fair value is below its historical
cost. Therefore, Unilever debits Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land for €120,000 to
eliminate its balance. In addition, Unilever reports a Loss on Impairment of €20,000
(€400,000 − €380,000), reducing net income. Unilever makes the following entry to
record the decrease in fair value of the land.
December 31, 2023
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land
Loss on Impairment
Land (€520,000 − €380,000)
 
(To record decrease in value of land below historical cost)  
 
Illustration 11A.2 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Unilever in

Date
Item
Land Fair
Value
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income (AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.2 Summary of Revaluation—2023
The decrease to Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land of €120,000 reduces other
comprehensive income, which then reduces the balance in accumulated other
comprehensive income. The Loss on Impairment of €20,000 reduces net income and
retained earnings. In this case, Unilever had a revaluation decrease which first reverses
any increases that Unilever reported in prior periods as an unrealized gain. Any additional
amount is reported as an impairment loss. Under no circumstances can the
revaluation decrease reduce accumulated other comprehensive income below
zero.
Revaluation—2024: Recovery of Impairment Loss
At December 31, 2024, Unilever’s land value increases to €415,000, an increase of
€35,000 (€415,000 − €380,000). In this case, the Loss on Impairment of €20,000 is
reversed and the remaining increase of €15,000 is reported in other comprehensive
income. Unilever makes the following entry to record this transaction.
December 31, 2024
Land
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Land
 
Recovery of Impairment Loss
 
(Revaluation of land, recovery of impairment loss)  
 
Illustration 11A.3 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Unilever in

Date
Item
Land Fair
Value
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income (AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec. 31,
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.3 Summary of Revaluation—2024
The recovery of the impairment loss of €20,000 increases income (and retained earnings)
only to the extent that it reverses previously recorded impairment losses.
On January 2, 2025, Unilever sells the land for €415,000. Unilever makes the following
entry to record this transaction.
January 2, 2025
Cash
Land
 
(To record sale of land)  
 
In this case, Unilever does not record a gain or loss because the carrying amount of the
land is the same as its fair value. At this time, since the land is sold, Unilever will transfer
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI) to Retained Earnings. The entry to
record the transfer is as follows.
January 2, 2025
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Retained Earnings
 
(To eliminate the remaining balance in AOCI)  
 

The purpose of this transfer is to eliminate the unrealized gain on the land that was sold.
It should be noted that transfers from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income cannot
increase net income. This last entry illustrates why revaluation accounting is not popular.
Even though the land has appreciated in value by €15,000, Unilever is not able to
recognize this gain in net income over the periods that it held the land.
Revaluation of Depreciable Assets
To illustrate the accounting for revaluations using depreciable assets, assume that Nokia
(FIN) purchases equipment for €1,000,000 on January 2, 2022. The equipment has a
useful life of five years, is depreciated using the straight-line method of depreciation, and
its residual value is zero.
Revaluation—2022: Valuation Increase
Nokia chooses to revalue its equipment to fair value over the life of equipment. Nokia
records depreciation expense of €200,000 (€1,000,000 ÷ 5) as follows.
December 31, 2022
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
 
(To record depreciation expense at December 31, 2022)  
 
After this entry, Nokia’s equipment has a carrying amount of €800,000 (€1,000,000 −
€200,000). Nokia employs an independent appraiser, who determines that the fair value
of equipment at December 31, 2022, is €950,000. To report the equipment at fair value,
Nokia does the following.
1. Reduces the Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment account to zero.
2. Reduces the Equipment account by €50,000—it then is reported at its fair value of
3. Records an Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment for the difference between
the fair value and carrying amount of the equipment, or €150,000 (€950,000 −
€800,000). The entry to record this revaluation at December 31, 2022, is as follows.
December 31, 2022
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Equipment
 
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment
 
(To adjust the equipment to fair value and record unrealized gain)  
 
Illustration 11A.4 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Nokia in

Date
Item
Equipment
Fair Value
Accumulated
Depreciation
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
(AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation
 
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.4 Revaluation Summary—2022
Following these revaluation adjustments, the carrying amount of the asset is now
€950,000. Nokia reports depreciation expense of €200,000 in the income statement and
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment of €150,000 in other comprehensive
income. This unrealized gain increases accumulated other comprehensive income
(reported on the statement of financial position in the equity section).
Revaluation—2023: Decrease Below Historical Cost
Assuming no change in the useful life of the equipment, depreciation expense for Nokia
in 2023 is €237,500 (€950,000 ÷ 4), and the entry to record depreciation expense is as
follows.
December 31, 2023
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
 
(To record depreciation expense at December 31, 2023)  
 
Under IFRS, Nokia may transfer from AOCI the difference between depreciation based on
the revalued carrying amount of the equipment and depreciation based on the asset’s
original cost to retained earnings. Depreciation based on the original cost was €200,000
(€1,000,000 ÷ 5) and on fair value is €237,500, or a difference of €37,500 (€237,500 −
€200,000). The entry to record this transfer is as follows.
December 31, 2023
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Retained Earnings
 
(To record transfer from AOCI to Retained Earnings)  
 
At this point, before revaluation in 2023, Nokia has the following amounts related to its
equipment.
Equipment

Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
Carrying amount
Accumulated other comprehensive income
€112,500 (€150,000 − €37,500)11
Nokia determines through appraisal that the equipment now has a fair value of €570,000.
To report the equipment at fair value, Nokia does the following.
1. Reduces the Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment account of €237,500 to zero.
2. Reduces the Equipment account by €380,000 (€950,000 − €570,000)—it then is
reported at its fair value of €570,000.
3. Reduces Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment by €112,500, to offset the
balance in the unrealized gain account (related to the revaluation in 2022).
4. Records a loss on impairment of €30,000.
The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Loss on Impairment
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment
Equipment
 
(To adjust the equipment to fair value and record
impairment loss)
 
 
Illustration 11A.5 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Nokia in

Date
Item
Equipment
Fair Value
Accumulated
Depreciation
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
(AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
 
 
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation  
 
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation
Dec. 31,
Transfer
from AOCI
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.5 Revaluation Summary—2023
Following the revaluation entry, the carrying amount of the equipment is now €570,000.
Nokia reports depreciation expense of €237,500 and an impairment loss of €30,000 in
the income statement (which reduces retained earnings).12 Nokia reports the reversal of
the previously recorded unrealized gain by recording the transfer to retained earnings of
€37,500 and the entry to Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment of €112,500. These
two entries reduce the balance in AOCI to zero.
Revaluation—2024: Recovery of Impairment Loss
Assuming no change in the useful life of the equipment, depreciation expense for Nokia
in 2024 is €190,000 (€570,000 ÷ 3), and the entry to record depreciation expense is as
follows.
December 31, 2024
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment  
(To record depreciation expense)
 
 

Nokia transfers the difference between depreciation based on the revalued carrying
amount of the equipment and depreciation based on the asset’s original cost from AOCI
to retained earnings. Depreciation based on the original cost was €200,000 (€1,000,000 ÷
5) and on fair value is €190,000, or a difference of €10,000 (€200,000 − €190,000). The
entry to record this transfer is as follows.
December 31, 2024
Retained Earnings
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
 
(To record transfer from AOCI to Retained Earnings)  
 
At this point, before revaluation in 2024, Nokia has the following amounts related to its
equipment.
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
Carrying amount
Accumulated other comprehensive income
Nokia determines through appraisal that the equipment now has a fair value of €450,000.
To report the equipment at fair value, Nokia does the following.
1. Reduces the Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment account of €190,000 to zero.
2. Reduces the Equipment account by €120,000 (€570,000 − €450,000)—it then is
reported at its fair value of €450,000.
3. Records an Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment for €40,000.
4. Records a Recovery of Impairment Loss of €30,000.
The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
December 31, 2024
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Unrealized Gain on Revaluation—Equipment
 
Equipment
 
Recovery of Impairment Loss
 
(To adjust the equipment to fair value and record impairment loss
recovery)
 
 
Illustration 11A.6 provides a summary of the revaluation adjustments for Nokia in

Date
Item
Equipment
Fair Value
Accumulated
Depreciation
Retained
Earnings
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income
(AOCI)
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
 
 
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation  
 
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation  
Dec. 31,
Transfer
from AOCI
 
 
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
Jan. 1,
Beginning
balance
€
€
Dec. 31,
Depreciation
Dec. 31,
Transfer
from AOCI
Dec. 31,
Revaluation
Dec.
Ending
balance
ILLUSTRATION 11A.6 Revaluation Summary—2024
Following the revaluation entry, the carrying amount of the equipment is now €450,000.
Nokia reports depreciation expense of €190,000 and an impairment loss recovery of
€30,000 in the income statement. Nokia records €40,000 to Unrealized Gain on
Revaluation—Equipment, which increases AOCI to €50,000.
On January 2, 2025, Nokia sells the equipment for €450,000. Nokia makes the following
entry to record this transaction.

January 2, 2025
Cash
Equipment
 
(To record sale of equipment)  
 
Nokia does not record a gain or loss because the carrying amount of the equipment is the
same as its fair value. Nokia transfers the remaining balance in Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Income to Retained Earnings because the equipment has been sold. The
entry to record this transaction is as follows.
January 2, 2025
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
Retained Earnings
 
(To eliminate the remaining balance in AOCI)  
 
The transfer from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income does not increase net
income. Even though the equipment has appreciated in value by €50,000, the company
does not recognize this gain in net income over the periods that Nokia held the
equipment.
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
accelerated depreciation methods
activity method
amortization
asset turnover
cash-generating unit (CGU)
component depreciation
cost depletion
declining (reducing)-balance method
depletion,
depreciation
depreciable base
development costs
diminishing (accelerated)-charge methods
double-declining-balance method
exploratory and evaluation (E&E) costs
fair value less costs to sell

full-cost concept
half-year convention
impairment
impairment test
inadequacy
liquidating dividends
mineral resources
natural resources
obsolescence
pre-exploratory expenditures
profit margin on sales
recoverable amount
residual (salvage) value
restoration costs
return on assets (ROA)
revaluation surplus
straight-line method
successful-efforts concept
sum-of-the-years’-digits method
supersession
value-in-use
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe depreciation concepts and methods of depreciation.
Depreciation allocates the cost of tangible assets to expense in a systematic and rational
manner to those periods expected to benefit from the use of the asset. Three factors
involved in the depreciation process are (1) determining the depreciable base for the asset,
(2) estimating service lives, and (3) selecting a method of cost apportionment
(depreciation).
Methods of depreciation are as follows.
1. Activity method: Assumes that depreciation is a function of use or productivity
instead of the passage of time. The life of the asset is considered in terms of either
the output it provides, or an input measure such as the number of hours it works.
2. Straight-line method: Considers depreciation a function of time instead of a function
of usage. The straight-line procedure is often the most conceptually appropriate when

the decline in usefulness is constant from period to period.
3. Decreasing-charge methods: Provide for a higher depreciation cost in the earlier
years and lower charges in later periods. The main justification for this approach is
that the asset is the most productive in its early years.
2 Identify other depreciation issues.
IFRS requirements for other depreciation issues are as follows:
Component depreciation: Each part of an item of property, plant, and equipment that
is significant to the total cost of the asset must be depreciated separately.
Partial periods: In computing depreciation expense for partial periods, companies
must determine depreciation expense for the full year and then prorate this
depreciation expense between the two periods.
Replacement of property, plant, and equipment: Depreciation does not provide funds
for the replacement of property, plant, and equipment. It is simply a non-cash
expense.
Revision of depreciation rates: Companies report a change in estimate in the current
and prospective period. It does not adjust opening balances nor attempt to “catch up”
for prior periods.
3 Explain the accounting issues related to asset impairment.
The process to determine an impairment loss is as follows. (1) Review events and changes
in circumstances for indicators of impairment. (2) If impairment indicators are present,
an impairment test must be conducted. The impairment test compares the asset’s
recoverable amount (the higher of fair value less costs to sell or value-in-use) with its
carrying amount. If the carrying amount is higher than the recoverable amount, the
difference is an impairment loss. If the recoverable amount is greater than the carrying
amount, no impairment is recorded.
After a company records an impairment loss, the reduced carrying amount of the long-
lived asset is its new cost basis. Impairment losses may be reversed as long as the write-
up is never to an amount greater than the carrying amount before impairment. If the
company expects to dispose of the asset, it should report the impaired asset at the lower-
of-cost-or-net realizable value. Assets held for disposal are not depreciated.
4 Discuss the accounting procedures for depletion of mineral resources.
To account for depletion of mineral resources, companies (1) establish the depletion base
and (2) write off resource cost. Three types of costs are considered in establishing the
depletion base: (a) pre-exploratory costs, (b) exploration and evaluation costs, and (c)
development costs. To write off resource cost, companies normally compute depletion
using the units-of-production method. Thus, depletion is a function of the number of
units withdrawn during the period. To obtain a cost per unit of product, the total cost of

the mineral resource less residual value is divided by the number of units estimated to be
in the resource deposit. To compute depletion, this cost per unit is multiplied by the
number of units withdrawn.
5 Apply the accounting for revaluations.
Under IFRS, companies may choose to value long-lived assets at cost or at fair value.
When companies choose to report their long-lived tangible assets at fair value subsequent
to acquisition, they account for the change in the fair value by adjusting the appropriate
asset account and by recording an unrealized gain on the revalued long-lived tangible
asset, which is recorded in other comprehensive income.
6 Demonstrate how to report and analyze property, plant, equipment, and
mineral resources.
The basis of valuation for property, plant, and equipment and for mineral resources
should be disclosed along with pledges, liens, and other commitments related to these
assets. Companies should not offset any liability secured by property, plant, and
equipment or by mineral resources against these assets, but should report it in the
liabilities section. When depreciating assets, credit a valuation account normally called
Accumulated Depreciation. When depleting assets, use an accumulated depletion account,
or credit the depletion directly to the mineral resource account. Analysis may be
performed to evaluate the asset turnover, profit margin on sales, and return on assets.
*7 Illustrate revaluation accounting procedures.
The general rules for revaluation accounting are as follows. (1) Companies record
unrealized gains in other comprehensive income (the unrealized gain bypasses net
income). (2) Companies record losses on impairment (decrease of value below historical
cost) in net income. Thus, gains on revaluation increase equity but not net income,
whereas losses decrease equity and net income. (3) If a revaluation increase reverses a
decrease that was reported as an impairment loss, a company credits the revaluation
increase in net income; any additional valuation increase beyond the recovery is credited
to other comprehensive income.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with
solutions, and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Norwel SA manufactures miniature circuit boards used in smartphones. On June 5,
2022, Norwel purchased a circuit board stamping machine at a retail price of €24,000.
Norwel paid 5% sales tax on this purchase and hired a contractor to build a specially

wired platform for the machine for €1,800, to meet safety requirements. Norwel
estimates the machine will have a 5-year useful life, with a residual value of €2,000 at
the end of 5 years. Norwel uses straight-line depreciation and employs the “half-year”
convention in accounting for partial-year depreciation. Norwel’s fiscal year ends on
December 31.
Instructions
a. At what amount should Norwel record the acquisition cost of the machine?
b. How much depreciation expense should Norwel record in 2022 and in 2023?
c. At what amount will the machine be reported in Norwel’s statement of financial
position at December 31, 2023?
d. During 2024, Norwel’s circuit board business is experiencing significant
competition from companies with more advanced low-heat circuit boards. As a
result, at June 30, 2024, Norwel conducts an impairment evaluation of the
stamping machine purchased in 2022. Norwel determines that value-in-use for the
machine is estimated to be €13,000 and the fair value of the machine less costs to
sell, based on prices in the resale market, to be €13,400. Prepare the journal entry
to record an impairment, if any, on the stamping machine.
Solution
a. Historical cost is measured by the cash or cash equivalent price of obtaining the asset
and bringing it to the location and condition for its intended use. For Norwel, this is:
Price
Tax (€24,000 × .05)
Platform
Total
b. Depreciable base: €27,000 − €2,000 = €25,000
Depreciation expense: €25,000 ÷ 5 = €5,000 per year
2022: ½ year = €5,000 × .50 = €2,500
2023: full year = €5,000
c. The amount reported on the December 31, 2023, statement of financial position is
the cost of the asset less accumulated depreciation:
Machinery
Less: Accumulated depreciation
Book value
d. The recoverable amount is €13,400 (which is the greater of value in use and fair
value less costs to sell). Norwel will record an impairment, based on comparison of

the recoverable amount of the machine and platform to the book value. The entry is
as follows.
Loss on Impairment (€17,000* − €13,400) 3,600
Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery
*Cost
Less: Accumulated depreciation
 
(€2,500 + €5,000 + €2,500)
Book value of machine and platform €17,000
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics
Activities, and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in
Wiley’s online courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendix
to the chapter.
Questions
1. Distinguish among depreciation, depletion, and amortization.
2. Identify the factors that are relevant in determining the annual depreciation charge,
and explain whether these factors are determined objectively or whether they are based
on judgment.
3. Some believe that accounting depreciation measures the decline in the value of
property, plant, and equipment. Do you agree? Explain.
4. Explain how estimation of service lives can result in unrealistically high valuations of
property, plant, and equipment.
5. The plant manager of a manufacturing firm suggested in a conference of the company’s
executives that accountants should speed up depreciation on the machinery in the
finishing department because improvements were rapidly making those machines
obsolete, and a depreciation fund big enough to cover their replacement was needed.
Discuss the accounting concept of depreciation and the effect on a business concern of the
depreciation recorded for plant assets, paying particular attention to the issues raised by
the plant manager.
6. For what reasons are plant assets retired? Define inadequacy, supersession, and
obsolescence.
7. What basic questions must be answered before the amount of the depreciation charge
can be computed?
8. Workman Group purchased a machine on January 2, 2022, for €800,000. The machine
has an estimated useful life of 5 years and a residual value of €100,000. Depreciation was
computed by the 150% declining-balance method. What is the amount of accumulated
depreciation at December 31, 2023?

9. Silverman Company purchased machinery for $162,000 on January 1, 2022. It is
estimated that the machinery will have a useful life of 20 years, residual value of $15,000,
production of 84,000 units, and working hours of 42,000. During 2022, the company uses
the machinery for 14,300 hours, and the machinery produces 20,000 units. Compute
depreciation under the straight-line, units-of-output, working hours, sum-of-the-years’-
digits, and double-declining-balance methods.
10. What are the major factors considered in determining what depreciation method to
use?
11. What is component depreciation?
12. A building that was purchased December 31, 1998, for £2,500,000 was originally
estimated to have a life of 50 years with no residual value at the end of that time.
Depreciation has been recorded through 2022. During 2023, an examination of the
building by an engineering firm discloses that its estimated useful life is 15 years after
2022. What should be the amount of depreciation for 2023?
13. Charlie Parker, president of Spinners Company, has recently noted that depreciation
increases cash provided by operations and therefore depreciation is a good source of
funds. Do you agree? Discuss.
14. Andrea Shen purchased a computer for €8,000 on July 1, 2022. She intends to
depreciate it over 4 years using the double-declining-balance method. Residual value is
€1,000. Compute depreciation for 2023.
15. Walkin Inc. is considering the write-down of its long-term plant because of a lack of
profitability. Explain to the management of Walkin how to determine whether a write-
down is permitted.
16. Last year, Wyeth Company recorded an impairment on an asset held for use. Recent
appraisals indicate that the asset has increased in value. Should Wyeth record this
recovery in value?
17. Toro SA has equipment with a carrying amount of €700,000. The value-in-use of the
equipment is €705,000, and its fair value less cost of disposal is €590,000. The
equipment is expected to be used in operations in the future. What amount (if any)
should Toro report as an impairment to its equipment?
18. Explain how gains or losses on impaired assets should be reported in income.
19. It has been suggested that plant and equipment could be replaced more quickly if
depreciation rates for income tax and accounting purposes were substantially increased.
As a result, business operations would receive the benefit of more modern and more
efficient plant facilities. Discuss the merits of this proposition.
20. List (a) the similarities and (b) the differences in the accounting treatments of
depreciation and cost depletion.
21. Describe cost depletion.
22. Explain the difference between exploration and development costs as used in the
extractive industries.

23. In the extractive industries, businesses may pay dividends in excess of net income.
What is the maximum permissible? How can this practice be justified?
24. Shumway Oil uses successful-efforts accounting for its exploration and evaluation
costs but also provides full-cost results as well. Under full-cost results, Shumway Oil
would have reported retained earnings of $42 million and net income of $4 million.
Under successful-efforts accounting, retained earnings were $29 million and net income
was $3 million. Explain the difference between full-costing and successful-efforts
accounting.
25. Tanaka Ltd. has land that cost ¥15,000,000. Its fair value on December 31, 2022, is
¥20,000,000. Tanaka chooses the revaluation model to report its land. Explain how the
land and its related valuation should be reported.
26. Why might a company choose not to use revaluation accounting?
27. Vodafone (GBR) reported net income of £2.8 billion, net sales of £42 billion, and
average total assets of £140 billion. What is Vodafone’s asset turnover? What is
Vodafone’s return on assets?
*28. Mandive Corp., in accordance with IFRS, applies revaluation accounting to plant
assets with a carrying amount of $400,000, a useful life of 4 years, and no residual value.
At the end of year 1, independent appraisers determine that the asset has a fair value of
$360,000. Prepare the entries to record this revaluation and depreciation, assuming
straight-line depreciation.
Brief Exercises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 8
Compare accounting procedures for property, plant, and equipment under IFRS and
U.S. GAAP.
U.S. GAAP adheres to many of the same principles as IFRS in the accounting for property,
plant, and equipment. Major differences relate to use of component depreciation,
impairments, and revaluations.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
property, plant, and equipment.
Similarities
The definition of property, plant, and equipment is essentially the same under U.S.
GAAP and IFRS.
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, changes in depreciation method and changes in
useful life are treated in the current and future periods. Prior periods are not affected.
The accounting for plant asset disposals is the same under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
The accounting for the initial costs to acquire natural resources is similar under U.S.
GAAP and IFRS.
Under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS, interest costs incurred during construction must be
capitalized. Recently, IFRS converged to U.S. GAAP.
The accounting for exchanges of non-monetary assets is essentially the same in U.S.
GAAP and IFRS. U.S. GAAP requires that gains on exchanges of non-monetary assets
be recognized if the exchange has commercial substance. This is the same framework
used in IFRS.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS both view depreciation as allocation of cost over an asset’s life.
U.S. GAAP and IFRS permit the same depreciation methods (straight-line,
diminishing-balance, units-of-production).
Differences
Under U.S. GAAP, component depreciation is permitted but is rarely used. IFRS
requires component depreciation.
U.S. GAAP does not permit revaluations of property, plant, equipment, and mineral
resources. Under IFRS, companies can use either the historical cost model or the
revaluation model.
In testing for impairments of long-lived assets, U.S. GAAP uses a different model
than IFRS (details of the U.S. GAAP impairment test are presented in the About the
Numbers discussion). Under U.S. GAAP, as long as future undiscounted cash flows
exceed the carrying amount of the asset, no impairment is recorded. The IFRS

impairment test is stricter. However, unlike U.S. GAAP, IFRS permits reversals of
impairment losses.
Under U.S. GAAP, all losses on non-monetary asset exchanges are recognized
immediately.
About the Numbers
As indicated, impairment testing under U.S. GAAP is a two-step process. Illustration
GAAP 11.1 summarizes impairment measurement under U.S. GAAP. The key distinctions
relative to IFRS relate to the use of a cash flow recovery test to determine whether an
impairment test should be performed. Also, U.S. GAAP does not permit reversal of
impairment losses for assets held for use.
On the Horizon
With respect to revaluations, as part of the conceptual framework project, the Boards will
examine the measurement bases used in accounting. It is too early to say whether a
converged conceptual framework will recommend fair value measurement (and
revaluation accounting) for property, plant, and equipment. However, this is likely to be
one of the more contentious issues, given the long-standing use of historical cost as a
measurement basis in U.S. GAAP.
ILLUSTRATION GAAP 11.1 U.S. GAAP Impairment Measurement

GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. All of the following are key similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for property, plant, and equipment except:
a. the definition of property, plant, and equipment is essentially the same.
b. changes in depreciation method and changes in useful life are treated in the current
and future periods.
c. both U.S. GAAP and IFRS allow revaluation accounting.
d. the accounting for plant asset disposals is the same under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
2. All of the following are key differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for property, plant and equipment except:
a. under U.S. GAAP, component depreciation is permitted but is rarely used.
b. U.S. GAAP does not permit revaluations of property, plant, and equipment, and
mineral resources.
c. in testing for impairments of long-lived assets, U.S. GAAP compares value-in-use to
the carrying value of the asset.
d. under U.S. GAAP, impairment testing is a two-step process.
3. Which of the following statements is correct?
a. Both IFRS and U.S. GAAP permit revaluation of property, plant, and equipment.
b. IFRS permits revaluation of property, plant, and equipment, but not U.S. GAAP.
c. Neither IFRS nor U.S. GAAP permit revaluation of property, plant, and equipment.
d. U.S. GAAP permits revaluation of property, plant, and equipment, but IFRS does not.
4. Hilo Company has land that cost $350,000 but now has a fair value of $500,000.
Which of the following statements is correct?
a. Under IFRS, Hilo Company must continue to report the land at $350,000 (if using
revaluation accounting).
b. Under U.S. GAAP, Hilo Company would report a net income increase of $150,000 due
to an increase in the value of the land.
c. Under U.S. GAAP, Hilo Company would credit Unrealized Gain on Revaluation by
d. Under IFRS, Hilo Company would credit Unrealized Gain on Revaluation for
5. Under U.S. GAAP, an impairment of property, plant, and equipment:
a. may always be reversed if the fair value subsequently increases.

b. is based on a two-step model, comparing value-in-use to the carrying value of the
asset.
c. may be reversed for assets held for sale.
d. is measured based on total future undiscounted cash flows.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP11.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between IFRS and
U.S. GAAP with respect to the accounting for property, plant, and equipment.
GAAP11.2 At a recent executive committee meeting, the controller for Ricardo Company
remarked, “With only a single key difference between IFRS and U.S. GAAP for property,
plant, and equipment, it should be smooth sailing for the IASB and FASB to converge
their standards in this area.” Prepare a response to the controller.
GAAP11.3 Moncrief Group, in accordance with IFRS, applies revaluation accounting to
plant assets with a carrying amount of $400,000, a useful life of 4 years, and no residual
value. At the end of year 1, independent appraisers determine that the asset has a fair
value of $460,000. Discuss how an analysis of ratios such as return on assets and return
on equity would be affected in comparing Moncrief to a U.S. GAAP company.
GAAP11.4 The real estate company Liberty International (now known as Intu)
(GBR) followed IFRS. In one year, Liberty disclosed the following information on
revaluations of its tangible fixed assets. The revaluation reserve measures the amount by
which tangible fixed assets are recorded above historical cost and is reported in Liberty’s
equity.
Liberty International
Completed Investment Properties
Completed investment properties are professionally valued on a market value basis by
external valuers at the balance sheet date. Surpluses and deficits arising during the year
are reflected in the revalution reserve.
Liberty reported the following additional data. Amounts for Kimco Realty (USA) (which
follows U.S. GAAP) in the same year are provided for comparison.
 
Liberty 
(pounds sterling, in thousands)
Kimco 
(dollars, in millions)
Total revenues
Average total assets
Net income
Instructions
a. Compute the following ratios for Liberty and Kimco.
1. Return on assets.
2. Profit margin.

3. Asset turnover.
How do these companies compare on these performance measures?
b. Liberty reported a revaluation surplus in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income
of £1,952. Assume that £1,550 of this amount arose from an increase in the net
replacement value of investment properties during the year. Prepare the journal entry
to record this increase.
c. Under IFRS, are Liberty’s assets and equity overstated? If so, why? When comparing
Liberty to U.S. companies, like Kimco, what adjustments would you need to make in
order to have valid comparisons of ratios such as those computed in (a) above?
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. c 2. c 3. b 4. d 5. c
Notes
1 Residual value does not include possible future inflation effects. [2]
2 The airline industry also illustrates the type of problem involved in estimation. In the
past, aircraft were assumed not to wear out—they just became obsolete. However,
some jets have been in service as long as 20 years, and maintenance of these aircraft
has become increasingly expensive. As a result, some airlines now replace aircraft not
because of obsolescence but because of physical deterioration.
3 Companies use the straight-line method more than any other method of depreciation.
In a survey of 200 international companies, straight-line depreciation was used 170
times, declining-balance 11 times, units-of-production (activity method) 18 times, and
other (e.g., proportion of proven reserve) 8 times. In some cases, companies use two or
more depreciation methods. See IFRS Accounting Trends & Techniques.
4 What happens if the estimated service life of the asset is, let us say, 51 years? How
would we calculate the sum-of-the-years’-digits? Fortunately, mathematicians have
developed the following formula that permits easy computation:
=
= 1,326
5 A pure form of the declining-balance method (sometimes called the “fixed percentage of
book value method”) has also been suggested as a possibility. This approach uses a rate
that depreciates the asset exactly to the residual value at the end of its expected useful
life. The formula for determining the rate is as follows.
Depreciation rate = 1−n√
The life in years is n. After computing the depreciation rate, a company applies it on the
declining book value of the asset from period to period, which means that depreciation
n(n + 1)
51(51 + 1)
Residual value
Acquisition cost

expense will be successively lower. This method is not used extensively in practice, and
it is generally not permitted for tax purposes.
6 Recently, Intel (USA) indicated that due to slower product cycles, it will also depreciate
its machinery and equipment more slowly, resulting in an average useful life of five
years instead of four. This change in estimate will mean that Intel will book $1.5 billion
less in depreciation expense, which will increase its profitability (in Chapter 22, we
provide a more complete discussion of changes in estimates). Is the change a positive
for Intel? Only time will tell, as the change could signal problems for Intel (and others)
in the global semiconductor industry due to reduced sales of its products in the future.
7 If a company can more readily determine value-in-use (or fair value less costs to sell)
and it determines that no impairment is needed, it is not required to compute the other
measure. [6]
8 Specifically, the pretax rate is determined taking into account market- and company-
specific borrowing rates, adjusted for any risks the market might attribute to expected
cash flows for the asset. [8]
9 The IASB has conducted a research project on the extractive industry. The primary focus
is on the financial reporting issues associated with mineral and other natural resource
reserves. The key question is whether and how to define, recognize, measure, and
disclose reserves in the financial statements. At present, the Board is contemplating an
agenda decision for a future standard. See the IFRS website for more information.
10 When a depreciable asset is revalued, companies use one of two approaches to record
the revaluation. As an alternative to the one shown here, companies restate on a
proportionate basis the cost and accumulated depreciation of the asset, such that the
carrying amount of the asset after revaluation equals its revalued amount.
11 The entry for the transfer recognizes that any depreciation on the revalued part of the
asset’s carrying amount has been realized by being charged to retained earnings. By
making this entry, it should be noted that the historical cost carrying amount (as if no
revaluations have been recorded) can be determined by deducting the AOCI balance
from the revalued carrying amount. In this case, the historical cost carrying amount
after two years is €600,000 (€1,000,000 – €200,000 – €200,000), which is equal to
the revalued carrying amount of €712,500 less AOCI of €112,500.
12 Another way to compute the loss on impairment of €30,000 is to determine the
historical cost carrying amount of the equipment at December 31, 2023, which is
€600,000 (€1,000,000 − €200,000 − €200,000), and subtract the fair value of the
equipment (€570,000).
Sources: A portion of this discussion is taken from Top 10 Tips for Impairment Testing, PricewaterhouseCoopers
(December 2008); and Impairment of Non-Financial Assets, PricewaterhouseCoopers (March 2015).