CHAPTER 3
The Accounting Information System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe the basic accounting information system.
2. Record and summarize basic transactions.
3. Identify and prepare adjusting entries.
4. Prepare financial statements from the adjusted trial balance and prepare closing entries.
5. Prepare financial statements for a merchandising company.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are integral to
the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 3
As the following opening story indicates, blockchain technologies hold promise as part of a
reliable accounting information system for many companies. The purpose of this chapter is to
explain and illustrate the features of an accounting information system. The content and
organization of this chapter are as follows.
Working on the Chain Gang
Advanced information technology and accounting have always moved in tandem. For example,
consider an emerging technology called blockchain, which has the potential to be deployed in
accounting systems. What is blockchain? It is a digital ledger of economic transactions that is fully
public, continually updated by countless users in the cloud, and considered by many to be
impossible to corrupt. A blockchain database contains two types of records: transactions and
blocks. Blocks hold batches of transactions. The blocks are time-stamped and link to a previous
block.

Accounting information systems have been built on database technology for a long time. The
reason for the recent interest in blockchain technologies for accounting systems has to do with
some unique features:
1. Blockchain technologies can be used to create a database of information that is immutable.
Being immutable means that once information is stored in the blockchain, the original record
cannot be altered without detection. This has useful potential for accounting systems, as it is
important that accounting records are complete and not altered.
2. Blockchain records are stored in a distributed system. In a distributed system, there are always
multiple copies of the database, and all copies are the same at any point in time.
3. Blockchain systems can be built using public or shared databases. While this feature is
essential for cryptocurrency payment systems such as bitcoin, it is less clear that this would be
the case for accounting systems, which typically contain private information. However, it is
conceivable that by using a common, public shared ledger, a company might have accounting
records that would allow for a much more efficient audit process.
Many accounting firms have established special teams and groups that are focused on blockchain
technologies and their applications to accounting. For example, one firm has established a group
that can provide blockchain validation. Essentially, this would be an audit of the technologies and
data in a blockchain so that others could rely on it. Another large accounting firm has begun to
offer its own blockchain for use by large financial services companies, to keep records of stock and
other financial product ownership. While the exact future uses of blockchain technologies are not
yet clear, all involved are certain that blockchain systems will be a common part of the accounting
information system of the future for many organizations.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted summary
review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with annotated
solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions, are also
available online.
Accounting Information System
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe the basic accounting information system.
An accounting information system collects and processes transaction data and then
disseminates the financial information to interested parties. Accounting information systems vary
widely from one business to another. Various factors shape these systems: the nature of the
business and the transactions in which it engages, the size of the firm, the volume of data to be
handled, and the informational demands of management and others.
As we discussed in the opening story, companies are placing a renewed focus on their accounting
systems in light of blockchain innovations to ensure relevant and representationally faithful
information is reported in financial statements. A good accounting information system helps
management answer such questions as:
How much and what kind of debt is outstanding?
Were our sales higher this period than last?

What assets do we have?
What were our cash inflows and outflows?
Did we make a profit last period?
Are any of our product lines or divisions operating at a loss?
Can we safely increase our dividends to shareholders?
Is our rate of return on net assets increasing?
Management can answer many other questions with the data provided by an efficient accounting
system. A well-devised accounting information system benefits every type of company.
Basic Terminology
Financial accounting rests on a set of concepts (discussed in Chapters 1 and 2) for identifying,
recording, classifying, and interpreting transactions and other events relating to enterprises. You
therefore need to understand the basic terminology employed in collecting accounting
data.

Basic Terminology
Event. A happening of consequence. An event generally is the source or cause of changes in
assets, liabilities, and equity. Events may be external or internal.
Transaction. An external event involving a transfer or exchange between two or more
entities.
Account. A systematic arrangement that shows the effect of transactions and other events on
a specific element (asset, liability, and so on). Companies keep a separate account for each
asset, liability, revenue, and expense, and for capital (owners’ equity). Because the format of
an account often resembles the letter T, it is sometimes referred to as a T-account (see
Illustration 3.3).
Real and Nominal Accounts. Real (permanent) accounts are asset, liability, and equity
accounts; they appear on the statement of financial position. Nominal (temporary)
accounts are revenue, expense, and dividend accounts; except for dividends, they appear on
the income statement. Companies periodically close nominal accounts; they do not close real
accounts.
Ledger. The book (or computer printouts) containing the accounts. A general ledger is a
collection of all the asset, liability, equity, revenue, and expense accounts. A subsidiary
ledger contains the details related to a given general ledger account.
Journal. The “book of original entry” where the company initially records transactions and
selected other events. Various amounts are transferred from the book of original entry, the
journal, to the ledger. Entering transaction data in the journal is known as journalizing.
Posting. The process of transferring the essential facts and figures from the book of original
entry to the ledger accounts.
Trial Balance. The list of all open accounts in the ledger and their balances. The trial balance
taken immediately after all adjustments have been posted is called an adjusted trial
balance. A trial balance taken immediately after closing entries have been posted is called a
post-closing (or after-closing) trial balance. Companies may prepare a trial balance at
any time.
Adjusting Entries. Entries made at the end of an accounting period to bring all accounts up
to date on an accrual basis, so that the company can prepare correct financial statements.
Financial Statements. Statements that reflect the collection, tabulation, and final
summarization of the accounting data. Four statements are involved: (1) The statement of
financial position shows the financial condition of the enterprise at the end of a period. (2)
The income statement (or statement of comprehensive income) measures the results of
operations during the period. (3) The statement of cash flows reports the cash provided
and used by operating, investing, and financing activities during the period. (4) The
statement of retained earnings (or retained earnings statement) reconciles the balance of
the Retained Earnings account from the beginning to the end of the period.
Closing Entries. The formal process by which the enterprise reduces all nominal accounts to
zero and determines and transfers the net income or net loss to an equity account. Also known
as “closing the ledger,” “closing the books,” or merely “closing.”
Debits and Credits

The terms debit (Dr.) and credit (Cr.) mean left and right, respectively. These terms do not mean
increase or decrease, but instead describe where a company makes entries in the recording process.
That is, when a company enters an amount on the left side of an account, it debits the account.
When it makes an entry on the right side, it credits the account. When comparing the totals of the
two sides, an account shows a debit balance if the total of the debit amounts exceeds the credits.
An account shows a credit balance if the credit amounts exceed the debits.
The positioning of debits on the left and credits on the right is simply an accounting custom. We
could function just as well if we reversed the sides. However, countries adopted the custom, now
the rule, of having debits on the left side of an account and credits on the right side, similar to the
custom of driving on one side of the road or the other. This rule applies to all accounts.
The equality of debits and credits provides the basis for the double-entry system of recording
transactions (sometimes referred to as double-entry bookkeeping). Under the universally used
double-entry accounting system, a company records the dual (two-sided) effect of each
transaction in appropriate accounts. This system provides a logical method for recording
transactions. It also offers a means of proving the accuracy of the recorded amounts. If a company
records every transaction with equal debits and credits, then the sum of all the debits to the
accounts must equal the sum of all the credits.
Illustration 3.1 presents the basic guidelines for an accounting system. Increases to all asset and
expense accounts occur on the left (or debit side) and decreases occur on the right (or credit side).
Conversely, increases to all liability and revenue accounts occur on the right (or credit side) and
decreases on the left (or debit side). A company increases equity accounts, such as Share Capital
and Retained Earnings, on the credit side, but increases Dividends on the debit side.
ILLUSTRATION 3.1 Double-Entry (Debit and Credit) Accounting System
The Accounting Equation
In a double-entry system, for every debit there must be a credit, and vice versa. This leads us, then,
to the basic equation in accounting (Illustration 3.2).

ILLUSTRATION 3.2 The Basic Accounting Equation
Illustration 3.3 expands this equation to show the accounts that make up equity. The figure also
shows the debit/credit rules and effects on each type of account. Study this diagram carefully. It
will help you understand the fundamentals of the double-entry system. Like the basic equation, the
expanded equation must also balance (total debits equal total credits).
ILLUSTRATION 3.3 Expanded Equation and Debit/Credit Rules and Effects
Every time a transaction occurs, the elements of the accounting equation change. However, the
basic equality remains. To illustrate, consider the following eight different transactions for Perez
Inc.
1. Owners invest $40,000 in exchange for ordinary shares.
2. Disburse $600 cash for administrative wages.
3. Purchase office equipment priced at $5,200, giving a 6 percent promissory note in exchange.
4. Receive $4,000 cash for services performed.

5. Pay off a short-term liability of $7,000.
6. Declare a cash dividend of $5,000.
7. Convert a non-current liability of $80,000 into ordinary shares.
8. Pay cash of $16,000 for a delivery van.
Financial Statements and Ownership Structure
The equity section of the statement of financial position reports share capital and retained
earnings. The income statement reports revenues and expenses. The retained earnings statement
reports dividends. Because a company transfers dividends, revenues, and expenses to retained
earnings at the end of the period, a change in any one of these three items affects equity.
Illustration 3.4 shows the income statement and equity relationships.

ILLUSTRATION 3.4 Income Statement and Equity Relationships
The company’s ownership structure dictates the types of accounts that are part of or affect the
equity section. A corporation commonly uses Share Capital, Share Premium, Dividends, and
Retained Earnings accounts. A proprietorship or a partnership uses an Owner’s Capital account and
an Owner’s Drawing account. An Owner’s Capital account indicates the owner’s or owners’
investment in the company. An Owner’s Drawing account tracks withdrawals by the owner(s).
Illustration 3.5 summarizes and relates the transactions affecting equity to the nominal
(temporary) and real (permanent) classifications and to the types of business ownership.

ILLUSTRATION 3.5 Effects of Transactions on Equity Accounts
The Accounting Cycle
Illustration 3.6 shows the steps in the accounting cycle. A company normally uses these
accounting procedures to record transactions and prepare financial statements.

ILLUSTRATION 3.6 The Accounting Cycle
Identifying and Recording Transactions and Other Events
The first step in the accounting cycle is analysis of transactions and selected other events. The first
problem is to determine what to record. Although IFRS provides guidelines, no simple rules exist
that state which events a company should record. Although changes in a company’s personnel or
managerial policies may be important, the company should not record these items in the accounts.
On the other hand, a company should record all cash sales or purchases—no matter how small.
The concepts we presented in Chapter 2 determine what to recognize in the accounts. An item
should be recognized in the financial statements provided that the item meets the definition of one
of the elements of financial statements and if such recognition provides users of financial
statements with (a) relevant information about the asset or the liability and about any income,
expenses, or changes in equity; and (b) a faithful representation of the asset or the liability and
of any income, expenses, or changes in equity. For example, should we value employees for
statement of financial position and income statement purposes (see Underlying Concepts)?

Certainly skilled employees are an important asset (highly relevant), but the problems of
determining their value and measuring it reliably have not yet been solved. Consequently, human
resources are not recorded. Perhaps when measurement techniques become more sophisticated
and accepted, such information will be presented, if only in supplemental form.
Underlying Concepts
Assets are present economic resources controlled by the entity as a result of past events. An
economic resource is a right that has the potential to produce economic benefits.
Transactions recorded may be an exchange between two entities where each receives and
sacrifices value, such as purchases and sales of goods or services. Or, transactions may be transfers
in one direction only. For example, an entity may incur a liability without directly receiving value in
exchange, such as charitable contributions (see Underlying Concepts). Other examples include
investments by owners, distributions to owners, payment of taxes, gifts, casualty losses, and thefts.
Underlying Concepts
A liability is a present obligation of the entity to transfer an economic resource as a result of
past events.
In short, a company records as many transactions as possible that affect its financial
position. As discussed earlier in the case of human resources, it omits some events because of
tradition and others because of complicated measurement problems. Recently, however, the
accounting profession has shown more receptiveness to accepting the challenge of measuring and
reporting events previously viewed as too complex and immeasurable.
Record and Summarize Basic Transactions
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Record and summarize basic transactions.
Journalizing
A company records in accounts those transactions and events that affect its assets, liabilities, and
equities. The general ledger contains all the asset, liability, and equity accounts. An account (see
Illustration 3.3) shows the effect of transactions on a particular asset, liability, equity, and revenue,
as well as expense accounts.
In practice, companies do not record transactions and selected other events originally in the ledger.
A transaction affects two or more accounts, each of which is on a different page in the ledger.
Therefore, in order to have a complete record of each transaction or other event in one place, a
company uses a journal (also called “the book of original entry”). In its simplest form, a general
journal chronologically lists transactions and other events, expressed in terms of debits and
credits to accounts.
As an example, Illustration 3.7 depicts the technique of journalizing, using two transactions for
Softbyte A.Ş. These transactions are:
September 1 Shareholders invested 15,000 cash in the company in exchange for ordinary shares.
Purchased computer equipment for 7,000 cash.

General Journal
J1
Date
Account Titles and Explanation Ref. Debit Credit
Sept. 1 Cash
Share Capital—Ordinary
(Issued ordinary shares for cash)
1 Equipment
Cash
(Purchased equipment for cash)
ILLUSTRATION 3.7 Technique of Journalizing
The J1 indicates these two entries are on the first page of the general journal.
Each general journal entry consists of four parts: (1) a date, (2) the accounts and amounts to be
debited (Dr.), (3) the accounts and amounts to be credited (Cr.), and (4) an explanation. A company
enters debits first, followed by the credits (slightly indented). The explanation begins below the
name of the last account to be credited and may take one or more lines. A company completes the
“Ref.” column at the time it posts to the accounts.
In some cases, a company uses special journals in addition to the general journal. Special
journals summarize transactions possessing a common characteristic (e.g., cash receipts, sales,
purchases, cash payments). As a result, using them reduces bookkeeping time.
Posting
The procedure of transferring journal entries to the ledger accounts is called posting. Posting
involves the following steps.
1. In the ledger, enter in the appropriate columns of the debited account(s) the date, journal
page, and debit amount shown in the journal.
2. In the reference column of the journal, write the account number to which the debit amount
was posted.
3. In the ledger, enter in the appropriate columns of the credited account(s) the date, journal
page, and credit amount shown in the journal.
4. In the reference column of the journal, write the account number to which the credit amount
was posted.
Illustration 3.8 diagrams these four steps, using the first journal entry of Softbyte. The
illustration shows the general ledger accounts in standard account form. Some companies call
this form the three-column form of account because it has three money columns—debit,
credit, and balance. The balance in the account is determined after each transaction. The
explanation space and reference columns provide special information about the transaction. The
boxed numbers indicate the sequence of the steps.

ILLUSTRATION 3.8 Posting a Journal Entry
The numbers in the “Ref.” column of the general journal refer to the ledger accounts to which a
company posts the respective items. For example, the “101” placed in the column to the right of
“Cash” indicates that the company posted this 15,000 item to Account No. 101 in the ledger.
The posting of the general journal is completed when a company records all of the posting
reference numbers opposite the account titles in the journal. Thus, the number in the posting
reference column serves two purposes: (1) It indicates the ledger account number of the account
involved; and, (2) It indicates the completion of posting for the particular item. Each company
selects its own numbering system for its ledger accounts. Many begin numbering with asset
accounts and then follow with liabilities, equity, revenue, and expense accounts, in that order.
The ledger accounts in Illustration 3.8 show the accounts after completion of the posting process.
The reference J1 (General Journal, page 1) indicates the source of the data transferred to the ledger
account.
Chart of Accounts
The number and type of accounts differ for each company. The number of accounts depends on the
amount of detail management desires. For example, the management of one company may want a
single account for all types of utility expense. Another may keep separate expense accounts for
each type of utility, such as gas, electricity, and water. Similarly, a small company like Softbyte will

have fewer accounts than a business giant like Anheuser-Busch InBev (BEL). Softbyte may be
able to manage and report its activities in 20 to 30 accounts, while Anheuser-Busch InBev may
require thousands of accounts to keep track of its worldwide activities.
Most companies have a chart of accounts. This chart lists the accounts and the account numbers
that identify their location in the ledger. The numbering system that identifies the accounts usually
starts with the statement of financial position accounts and follows with the income statement
accounts.
In this chapter, we will be explaining the accounting for Yazici Advertising A.Ş. (a service
company). The ranges of the account numbers are as follows.
Accounts 101–199 indicate asset accounts
200–299 indicate liabilities
300–399 indicate equity accounts
400–499, revenues
500–799, expenses
800–899, other revenues
900–999, other expenses
Illustration 3.9 shows the chart of accounts for Yazici Advertising A.Ş. You will notice that there
are gaps in the numbering system of the chart of accounts for Yazici Advertising A.Ş. Gaps are left
to permit the insertion of new accounts as needed during the life of the business.
Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Chart of Accounts
Assets
Equity
101 Cash
311 Share Capital—Ordinary
112 Accounts Receivable
320 Retained Earnings
113 Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
332 Dividends
126 Supplies
350 Income Summary
130 Prepaid Insurance
157 Equipment
Revenues
158 Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment 400 Service Revenue
Expenses
Liabilities
631 Supplies Expense
200 Notes Payable
711 Depreciation Expense
201 Accounts Payable
722 Insurance Expense
209 Unearned Service Revenue
726 Salaries and Wages Expense
212 Salaries and Wages Payable
729 Rent Expense
230 Interest Payable
732 Utilities Expense
905 Interest Expense
910 Bad Debt Expense
ILLUSTRATION 3.9 Chart of Accounts for Yazici Advertising A.Ş.

The Recording Process Illustrated
Illustrations 3.10 through 3.19 show the basic steps in the recording process, using the October
transactions of Yazici Advertising A.Ş. Yazici’s accounting period is a month. A basic analysis and a
debit-credit analysis precede the journalizing and posting of each transaction. For simplicity, we
use the T-account form in the illustrations instead of the standard account form.
ILLUSTRATION 3.10 Investment of Cash by Shareholders
Study these transaction analyses carefully. The purpose of transaction analysis is first to
identify the type of account involved, and then to determine whether to make a debit
or a credit to the account. You should always perform this type of analysis before preparing a
journal entry. Doing so will help you understand the journal entries discussed in this chapter as
well as more complex journal entries in later chapters.

ILLUSTRATION 3.11 Purchase of Office Equipment

ILLUSTRATION 3.12 Receipt of Cash for Future Service

ILLUSTRATION 3.13 Payment of Monthly Rent

ILLUSTRATION 3.14 Payment for Insurance

ILLUSTRATION 3.15 Purchase of Supplies on Credit
ILLUSTRATION 3.16 Signing a Contract

ILLUSTRATION 3.17 Declaration and Payment of Dividend

ILLUSTRATION 3.18 Payment of Salaries

ILLUSTRATION 3.19 Receipt of Cash for Services Provided
Trial Balance
A trial balance is a list of accounts and their balances at a given time. A company usually prepares
a trial balance at the end of an accounting period. The trial balance lists the accounts in the order in
which they appear in the ledger, with debit balances listed in the left column and credit balances in
the right column. The totals of the two columns must agree.
The trial balance proves the mathematical equality of debits and credits after posting. Under the
double-entry system this equality occurs when the sum of the debit account balances equals the
sum of the credit account balances. A trial balance also uncovers errors in journalizing and posting.
In addition, it is useful in the preparation of financial statements. The procedures for preparing a
trial balance consist of:
1. Listing the account titles and their balances.
2. Totaling the debit and credit columns.
3. Proving the equality of the two columns.
Illustration 3.20 presents the trial balance prepared from the ledger of Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Note that the total debits ( 287,000) equal the total credits ( 287,000). A trial balance also often

shows account numbers to the left of the account titles.
Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Trial Balance
October 31, 2022
Debit
Credit
Cash
Accounts Receivable
Supplies
Prepaid Insurance
Equipment
Notes Payable
Accounts Payable
Unearned Service Revenue
Share Capital—Ordinary
Dividends
Service Revenue
Salaries and Wages Expense
Rent Expense
ILLUSTRATION 3.20 Trial Balance (Unadjusted)
A trial balance does not prove that a company recorded all transactions or that the
ledger is correct. Numerous errors may exist even though the trial balance columns agree. For
example, the trial balance may balance even when a company (1) fails to journalize a transaction,
(2) omits posting a correct journal entry, (3) posts a journal entry twice, (4) uses incorrect accounts
in journalizing or posting, or (5) makes offsetting errors in recording the amount of a transaction.
In other words, as long as a company posts equal debits and credits, even to the wrong account or
in the wrong amount, the total debits will equal the total credits.
What Do the Numbers Mean?
Change Management
For companies considering adoption of IFRS, extensive planning is required to ensure that
accounting information system issues are addressed. Identifying the implications of required
or elected accounting changes, such as adopting a new set of accounting standards, takes time.
And the impact can be broad and vary in significance. The interrelationship of accounting
changes with information technology (IT) systems, business processes, taxes, and general
operations extends the time required to address all identified issues. In general, this process
may require a three- or four-year lead time to prepare the various accounting and reporting
systems for first-time adoption of IFRS.
Source: PricewaterhouseCoopers, IFRS and US GAAP: Similarities and Differences, 2018 Edition.

Identify and Prepare Adjusting Entries
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Identify and prepare adjusting entries.
In order for revenues to be recorded in the period in which services are performed and for expenses
to be recognized in the period in which they are incurred, companies make adjusting entries. In
short, adjustments ensure that companies, like SAP (DEU), Cathay Pacific Airways (HKG), and
Nokia (FIN), follow the revenue recognition and expense recognition principles.
The use of adjusting entries makes it possible to report on the statement of financial position the
appropriate assets, liabilities, and equity at the statement date. Adjusting entries also make it
possible to report on the income statement the proper revenues and expenses for the period.
However, the trial balance—the first pulling together of the transaction data—may not contain up-
to-date and complete data. This occurs for the following reasons.
1. Some events are not journalized daily because it is not expedient. Examples are the
consumption of supplies and the earning of salaries and wages by employees.
2. Some costs are not journalized during the accounting period because these costs expire with
the passage of time rather than as a result of recurring daily transactions. Examples of such
costs are building and equipment depreciation and rent and insurance.
3. Some items may be unrecorded. An example is a utility service bill that will not be received
until the next accounting period.
Adjusting entries are required every time a company, such as Sony (JPN), prepares financial
statements (see Underlying Concepts). At that time, Sony must analyze each account in the trial
balance to determine whether it is complete and up-to-date for financial statement purposes. The
analysis requires a thorough understanding of Sony’s operations and the interrelationship of
accounts. Because of this involved process, usually a skilled accountant prepares the adjusting
entries. In gathering the adjustment data, Sony may need to make inventory counts of supplies and
repair parts. Further, it may prepare supporting schedules of insurance policies, rental agreements,
and other contractual commitments. Companies often prepare adjustments after the statement of
financial position date. However, they date the entries as of the statement of financial position
date.
Underlying Concepts
Preparation of financial statements for subperiods such as quarters or months improves the
timeliness of the information but raises verifiability concerns due to estimates in preparing
adjusting entries.
Types of Adjusting Entries
Adjusting entries are classified as either deferrals or accruals. Each of these classes has two
subcategories, as Illustration 3.21 shows.

Deferrals:
1. Prepaid expenses: Expenses paid in cash before they are used or consumed.
2. Unearned revenues: Cash received before services are performed.
Accruals:
1. Accrued revenues: Revenues for services performed but not yet received in cash or recorded.
2. Accrued expenses: Expenses incurred but not yet paid in cash or recorded.
ILLUSTRATION 3.21 Categories of Adjusting Entries
We review specific examples and explanations of each type of adjustment in subsequent sections.
We base each example on the October 31 trial balance of Yazici Advertising A.Ş. (Illustration 3.20).
We assume that Yazici uses an accounting period of one month. Thus, Yazici will make monthly
adjusting entries, dated October 31.
Adjusting Entries for Deferrals
To defer means to postpone or delay. Deferrals are expenses or revenues that are recognized at a
date later than the point when cash was originally exchanged. The two types of deferrals are
prepaid expenses and unearned revenues.
If a company does not make an adjustment for these deferrals, the asset and liability
are overstated, and the related expense and revenue are understated. For example, in
Yazici Advertising’s trial balance (Illustration 3.20), the balance in the asset Supplies shows only
supplies purchased. This balance is overstated; the related expense account, Supplies Expense, is
understated because the cost of supplies used has not been recognized. Thus, the adjusting entry
for deferrals will decrease a statement of financial position account and increase an income
statement account. Illustration 3.22 shows the effects of adjusting entries for deferrals.

ILLUSTRATION 3.22 Adjusting Entries for Deferrals
Prepaid Expenses
Assets paid for and recorded before a company uses them are called prepaid expenses. When
expenses are prepaid, a company debits an asset account to show the service or benefit it will
receive in the future. Examples of common prepayments are insurance, supplies, advertising, and
rent. In addition, companies make prepayments when they purchase buildings and equipment.
Prepaid expenses are costs that expire either with the passage of time (e.g., rent and insurance) or
through use and consumption (e.g., supplies). The expiration of these costs does not require daily
entries, an unnecessary and impractical task. Accordingly, a company like Louis Vuitton (LVMH
Group) (FRA) usually postpones the recognition of such cost expirations until it prepares
financial statements. At each statement date, Louis Vuitton makes adjusting entries to record the
expenses that apply to the current accounting period and to show the remaining amounts in the
asset accounts.
As shown above, prior to adjustment, assets are overstated and expenses are understated. Thus,
an adjusting entry for prepaid expenses results in a debit to an expense account and a
credit to an asset account.
Supplies
A business may use several different types of supplies. For example, a public accounting firm will
use office supplies such as stationery, envelopes, and accounting paper. An advertising firm will
stock advertising supplies such as whiteboard markers and printer cartridges. Supplies are
generally debited to an asset account when they are acquired. Recognition of supplies used is
generally deferred until the adjustment process. At that time, a physical inventory (count) of

supplies is taken. The difference between the balance in the Supplies (asset) account and the cost
of supplies on hand represents the supplies used (expense) for the period.
For example, Yazici Advertising purchased advertising supplies costing 25,000 on October 5.
Yazici therefore debited the asset Supplies. This account shows a balance of 25,000 in the October
31 trial balance (see Illustration 3.20). An inventory count at the close of business on October 31
reveals that 10,000 of supplies are still on hand. Thus, the cost of supplies used is 15,000 (
25,000 – 10,000). The analysis and adjustment for Supplies is summarized in Illustration 3.23.
ILLUSTRATION 3.23 Adjustment for Supplies
After adjustment, the asset account Supplies now shows a balance of 10,000, which equals the
cost of supplies on hand at the statement date. In addition, Supplies Expense shows a balance of 
15,000, which equals the cost of supplies used in October. Without an adjusting entry,
October expenses are understated and net income overstated by 15,000. Moreover,
both assets and equity are overstated by 15,000 on the October 31 statement of
financial position.

Insurance
Most companies maintain fire and theft insurance on merchandise and equipment, personal
liability insurance for accidents suffered by customers, and automobile insurance on company cars
and trucks. The extent of protection against loss determines the cost of the insurance (the amount
of the premium to be paid). The insurance policy specifies the term and coverage. The minimum
term usually covers one year, but three- to five-year terms are available and may offer lower annual
premiums. A company typically debits insurance premiums to the asset account Prepaid Insurance
when paid. At the financial statement date, it then debits Insurance Expense and credits Prepaid
Insurance for the cost that expired during the period.
For example, on October 4, Yazici Advertising paid 6,000 for a one-year fire insurance policy,
beginning October 1. Yazici debited the cost of the premium to Prepaid Insurance at that time. This
account still shows a balance of 6,000 in the October 31 trial balance. An analysis of the policy
reveals that 500 ( 6,000 ÷ 12) of insurance expires each month. The analysis and adjustment for
insurance is summarized in Illustration 3.24.

ILLUSTRATION 3.24 Adjustment for Insurance
The asset Prepaid Insurance shows a balance of 5,500, which represents the unexpired cost for
the remaining 11 months of coverage. At the same time, the balance in Insurance Expense equals
the insurance cost that expired in October. Without an adjusting entry, October expenses
are understated by 500 and net income overstated by 500. Moreover, both assets
and equity also are overstated by 500 on the October 31 statement of financial
position.
Depreciation
Companies, like Caterpillar (USA) or Siemens (DEU), typically own various productive facilities,
such as buildings, equipment, and motor vehicles. These assets provide a service for a number of
years. The term of service is commonly referred to as the useful life of the asset. Because Siemens,
for example, expects an asset such as a building to provide service for many years, Siemens records
the building as an asset, rather than an expense, in the year the building is acquired. Siemens
records such assets at cost, as required by the historical cost principle.

To follow the expense recognition principle, Siemens should report a portion of the cost of a long-
lived asset as an expense during each period of the asset’s useful life. Depreciation is the process
of allocating the cost of an asset to expense over its useful life in a rational and systematic manner.
Need for Depreciation Adjustment
Under IFRS, the acquisition of productive facilities is viewed as a long-term prepayment for
services. The need for making periodic adjusting entries for depreciation is therefore the same as
we described for other prepaid expenses. That is, a company recognizes the expired cost (expense)
during the period and reports the unexpired cost (asset) at the end of the period. The primary
causes of depreciation of a productive facility are actual use, deterioration due to the elements, and
obsolescence. For example, at the time Siemens acquires an asset, the effects of these factors
cannot be known with certainty. Therefore, Siemens must estimate them. Thus, depreciation is
an estimate rather than a factual measurement of the expired cost.
To estimate depreciation expense, Siemens often divides the cost of the asset by its useful life. For
example, if Siemens purchases equipment for 10,000 and expects its useful life to be 10 years,
Siemens records annual depreciation of 1,000.
In the case of Yazici Advertising, it estimates depreciation on its office equipment to be 4,800 a
year (cost 50,000 less residual value 2,000 divided by useful life of 10 years), or 400 per
month. The analysis and adjustment for depreciation is summarized in Illustration 3.25. The
balance in the Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment account will increase 400 each month.
Therefore, after journalizing and posting the adjusting entry for the second month of use at
November 30, the balance will be 800.

ILLUSTRATION 3.25 Adjustment for Depreciation
Statement Presentation
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment is a contra asset account. A contra asset account offsets
an asset account on the statement of financial position. This means that the Accumulated
Depreciation—Equipment account offsets the Equipment account on the statement of financial
position. Its normal balance is a credit. Yazici Advertising uses this account instead of crediting
Equipment in order to disclose both the original cost of the equipment and the total expired cost to
date. In the statement of financial position, Yazici deducts Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
from the related asset account as shown in Illustration 3.26.
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
ILLUSTRATION 3.26 Statement of Financial Position Presentation of Accumulated
Depreciation
The book value (or carrying value) of any depreciable asset is the difference between its cost
and its related accumulated depreciation. In Illustration 3.26, the book value of the equipment at
the statement of financial position date is 49,600. Note that the asset’s book value generally
differs from its fair value. The reason: Depreciation is an allocation concept, not a
valuation concept. That is, depreciation allocates an asset’s cost to the periods in which it
is used. Depreciation does not attempt to report the actual change in the value of the
asset.
Depreciation expense identifies that portion of the asset’s cost that expired during the period (in
this case, October). Without this adjusting entry, total assets, total equity, and net
income are overstated, and depreciation expense is understated.
A company records depreciation expense for each piece of equipment, such as trucks or machinery,
and for all buildings. A company also establishes related accumulated depreciation accounts for the

above, such as Accumulated Depreciation—Trucks, Accumulated Depreciation—Machinery, and
Accumulated Depreciation—Buildings.
Unearned Revenues
When companies receive cash before services are performed, they record a liability by increasing
(crediting) a liability account called unearned revenues. In other words, a company now has a
performance obligation (liability) to provide service to one of its customers. Items like rent,
magazine subscriptions, and customer deposits for future service may result in unearned revenues.
Airlines, such as Ryanair (IRL), China Southern Airlines (CHN), and Southwest (USA), treat
receipts from the sale of tickets as unearned revenue until they satisfy the performance obligation
(provide the flight service). Tuition received prior to the start of a semester is another example of
unearned revenue.
Unearned revenues are the opposite of prepaid expenses. Indeed, unearned revenue on the books
of one company is likely to be a prepayment on the books of the company that made the advance
payment. For example, if we assume identical accounting periods, a landlord will have unearned
rent revenue when a tenant has prepaid rent.
When a company, such as Ryanair, receives payment for services to be performed in a future
accounting period, it credits an unearned revenue (a liability) account to recognize the liability that
exists. Ryanair subsequently recognizes revenue when it performs the service. However, making
daily recurring entries to record this revenue is impractical. Therefore, Ryanair delays recognition
of revenue until the adjustment process. Then, Ryanair makes an adjusting entry to record the
revenue for services performed during the period and to show the liability that remains at the end
of the accounting period. In the typical case, liabilities are overstated and revenues are understated
prior to adjustment. Thus, the adjusting entry for unearned revenues results in a debit
(decrease) to a liability account and a credit (increase) to a revenue account.
For example, Yazici Advertising received 12,000 on October 2 from R. Knox for advertising
services expected to be completed by December 31. Yazici credited the payment to Unearned
Service Revenue. This liability account shows a balance of 12,000 in the October 31 trial balance.

Based on an evaluation of the service Yazici performed for Knox during October, the company
determines that it should recognize 4,000 of revenue in October. The liability (Unearned Service
Revenue) is therefore decreased and equity (Service Revenue) is increased, as shown in
Illustration 3.27.
ILLUSTRATION 3.27 Adjustment for Unearned Service Revenue
The liability Unearned Service Revenue now shows a balance of 8,000. This amount represents
the remaining advertising services expected to be performed in the future. At the same time,
Service Revenue shows total revenue recognized in October of 104,000. Without this
adjustment, revenues and net income are understated by 4,000 in the income
statement. Moreover, liabilities are overstated and equity is understated by 4,000 on
the October 31 statement of financial position.
Adjusting Entries for Accruals
The second category of adjusting entries is accruals. Companies make adjusting entries for accruals
to record revenues for services performed and expenses incurred in the current accounting period.
Without an accrual adjustment, the revenue account (and the related asset account) or the expense
account (and the related liability account) are understated. Thus, the adjusting entry for accruals
will increase both a statement of financial position and an income statement account.
Illustration 3.28 shows adjusting entries for accruals.

ILLUSTRATION 3.28 Adjusting Entries for Accruals
Accrued Revenues
Revenues for services performed but not yet recorded at the statement date are accrued
revenues. Accrued revenues may accumulate (accrue) with the passing of time, as in the case of
interest revenue. These are unrecorded because the earning of interest does not involve daily
transactions. Companies do not record interest revenue on a daily basis because it is often
impractical to do so. Accrued revenues also may result from services that have been performed but
not yet billed nor collected, as in the case of commissions and fees. These may be unrecorded
because only a portion of the total service has been performed and the clients will not be billed
until the service has been completed.
An adjusting entry records the receivable that exists at the statement of financial position date and
the revenue for the services performed during the period. Prior to adjustment, both assets and

revenues are understated. Accordingly, an adjusting entry for accrued revenues results in a debit
(increase) to an asset account and a credit (increase) to a revenue account.
In October, Yazici Advertising performed services worth 2,000 that were not billed to clients on or
before October 31. Because these services are not billed, they are not recorded. The accrual of
unrecorded service revenue increases an asset account, Accounts Receivable. It also increases
equity by increasing a revenue account, Service Revenue, as shown in Illustration 3.29.
ILLUSTRATION 3.29 Accrual Adjustment for Receivable and Revenue Accounts
The asset Accounts Receivable shows that clients owe 74,000 at the statement of financial
position date. The balance of 106,000 in Service Revenue represents the total revenue for services
performed during the month ( 100,000 + 4,000 + 2,000). Without an adjusting entry,
assets and equity on the statement of financial position, and revenues and net income
on the income statement, are understated.
Accrued Expenses
Expenses incurred but not yet paid or recorded at the statement date are called accrued
expenses, such as interest, rent, taxes, and salaries. Accrued expenses result from the same causes
as accrued revenues. In fact, an accrued expense on the books of one company is an accrued
revenue to another company. For example, the 2,000 accrual of service revenue by Yazici
Advertising is an accrued expense to the client that received the service.
Adjustments for accrued expenses record the obligations that exist at the statement of financial
position date and recognize the expenses that apply to the current accounting period. Prior to
adjustment, both liabilities and expenses are understated. Therefore, the adjusting entry for
accrued expenses results in a debit (increase) to an expense account and a credit (increase) to a
liability account.
Accrued Interest
Yazici Advertising signed a three-month note payable in the amount of 50,000 on October 1. The
note requires interest at an annual rate of 12 percent. Three factors determine the amount of the
interest accumulation: (1) the face value of the note; (2) the interest rate, which is always
expressed as an annual rate; and (3) the length of time the note is outstanding. For Yazici, the total

interest due on the 50,000 note at its maturity date three months in the future is 1,500 ( 50,000
× .12 × 3/12), or 500 for one month. Illustration 3.30 shows the formula for computing interest
and its application to Yazici. Note that the formula expresses the time period as a fraction of a year.
ILLUSTRATION 3.30 Formula for Computing Interest for One Month
As Illustration 3.31 shows, the accrual of interest at October 31 increases a liability account,
Interest Payable. It also decreases equity by increasing an expense account, Interest Expense.
ILLUSTRATION 3.31 Adjustment for Interest
Interest Expense shows the interest charges for the month of October. Interest Payable shows the
amount of interest owed at the statement date. Yazici will not pay this amount until the note comes
due at the end of three months. Why does Yazici use the Interest Payable account instead of
crediting Notes Payable? By recording interest payable separately, Yazici discloses the two types of
obligations (interest and principal) in the accounts and statements. Without this adjusting
entry, both liabilities and interest expense are understated, and both net income and
equity are overstated.
Accrued Salaries and Wages
Companies pay for some types of expenses, such as employee salaries and wages, after the services
have been performed. For example, Yazici Advertising last paid salaries and wages on October 26. It
will not pay salaries and wages again until November 23. However, as shown in Illustration 3.32,
three working days remain in October (October 29–31).

ILLUSTRATION 3.32 Accrued Salaries and Wages
At October 31, the salaries and wages for these days represent an accrued expense and a related
liability to Yazici. The employees receive total salaries and wages of 10,000 for a five-day work
week, or 2,000 per day. Thus, accrued salaries and wages at October 31 are 6,000 ( 2,000 × 3).
The analysis and adjustment process is summarized in Illustration 3.33.
ILLUSTRATION 3.33 Adjustment for Salaries and Wages Expense
After this adjustment, the balance in Salaries and Wages Expense of 46,000 (23 days × 2,000) is
the actual salaries and wages expense for October. The balance in Salaries and Wages Payable of 
6,000 is the amount of the liability for salaries and wages owed as of October 31. Without the 
6,000 adjustment for salaries and wages, both Yazici’s expenses and liabilities are
understated by 6,000.
Yazici pays salaries and wages every four weeks. Consequently, the next payday is November 23,
when it will again pay total salaries and wages of 40,000. The payment consists of 6,000 of
salaries and wages payable at October 31 plus 34,000 of salaries and wages expense for November
(17 working days as shown in the November calendar × 2,000). Therefore, Yazici makes the
following entry on November 23.
November 23

Salaries and Wages Payable
Salaries and Wages Expense 34,000
Cash
(To record November 23 payroll)
This entry eliminates the liability for Salaries and Wages Payable that Yazici recorded in the
October 31 adjusting entry. This entry also records the proper amount of Salaries and Wages
Expense for the period between November 1 and November 23.
Bad Debts
Proper recognition of revenues and expenses dictates recording bad debts as an expense of the
period in which a company records revenue for services performed instead of the period in which
the company writes off the accounts or notes. The proper valuation of the receivable balance also
requires recognition of uncollectible receivables. Proper recognition and valuation require an
adjusting entry.
At the end of each period, a company, such as Marks and Spencer plc (M&S) (GBR), estimates
the amount of receivables that will later prove to be uncollectible. M&S bases the estimate on
various factors: the amount of bad debts it experienced in past years, general economic conditions,
how long the receivables are past due, and other factors that indicate the extent of uncollectibility.
To illustrate, assume that, based on past experience, Yazici Advertising reasonably estimates a bad
debt expense for the month of 1,600. The analysis and adjustment process for bad debts is
summarized in Illustration 3.34.

ILLUSTRATION 3.34 Adjustment for Bad Debt
Without this adjustment, assets will be overstated, and expenses will be understated.
The Allowance for Doubtful Accounts is a contra asset account and is shown on the statement of
financial position, similar to Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment.
A company often computes bad debts by adjusting the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts to a certain
percentage of the trade accounts receivable and trade notes receivable at the end of the period.
Adjusted Trial Balance
After journalizing and posting all adjusting entries, Yazici Advertising prepares another trial
balance from its ledger accounts (shown in Illustration 3.35). This trial balance is called an
adjusted trial balance. The purpose of an adjusted trial balance is to prove the equality of the
total debit balances and the total credit balances in the ledger after all adjustments. Because the
accounts contain all data needed for financial statements, the adjusted trial balance is the primary
basis for the preparation of financial statements.

Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Adjusted Trial Balance
October 31, 2022
Debit
Credit
Cash
Accounts Receivable
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Supplies
Prepaid Insurance
Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Notes Payable
Accounts Payable
Unearned Service Revenue
Salaries and Wages Payable
Interest Payable
Share Capital—Ordinary
Dividends
Service Revenue
Salaries and Wages Expense
Supplies Expense
Rent Expense
Insurance Expense
Interest Expense
Depreciation Expense
Bad Debt Expense
ILLUSTRATION 3.35 Adjusted Trial Balance
Preparing Financial Statements
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Prepare financial statements from the adjusted trial balance and prepare closing entries.
As indicated above Yazici Advertising can prepare financial statements directly from
the adjusted trial balance. Illustrations 3.36 and 3.37 show the interrelationships of data in the
adjusted trial balance and the financial statements.
As Illustration 3.36 shows, Yazici prepares the income statement from the revenue and expense
accounts. Next, it derives the retained earnings statement from the retained earnings and dividends
accounts and the net income (or net loss) shown in the income statement.

ILLUSTRATION 3.36 Preparation of the Income Statement and Retained Earnings
Statement from the Adjusted Trial Balance
As Illustration 3.37 shows, Yazici then prepares the statement of financial position from the
asset and liability accounts, the Share Capital—Ordinary account, and the ending retained earnings
balance as reported in the retained earnings statement.

ILLUSTRATION 3.37 Preparation of the Statement of Financial Position from the
Adjusted Trial Balance
Closing
The closing process reduces the balance of nominal (temporary) accounts to zero in order to
prepare the accounts for the next period’s transactions. In the closing process Yazici Advertising
transfers all of the revenue and expense account balances (income statement items) to a clearing
or suspense account called Income Summary. The Income Summary account matches revenues
and expenses.
Yazici uses this clearing account only at the end of each accounting period. The account represents
the net income or net loss for the period. It then transfers this amount (the net income or net loss)
to an equity account. (For a corporation, the equity account is retained earnings; for
proprietorships and partnerships, it is a capital account.) Companies post all such closing entries
to the appropriate general ledger accounts.
Closing Entries
In practice, companies generally prepare closing entries only at the end of a company’s annual
accounting period. However, to illustrate the journalizing and posting of closing entries, we will
assume that Yazici Advertising closes its books monthly. Illustration 3.38 shows the closing
entries at October 31.

GENERAL JOURNAL
J3
Date
Account Titles and Explanation
Ref. Debit
Credit
Closing Entries
Oct. 31 Service Revenue
Income Summary
(To close revenue account)
31 Income Summary
Supplies Expense
Depreciation Expense
Insurance Expense
Salaries and Wages Expense
Rent Expense
Interest Expense
Bad Debt Expense
(To close expense accounts)
31 Income Summary
Retained Earnings
(To close net income to retained earnings)
31 Retained Earnings
Dividends
(To close dividends to retained earnings)
ILLUSTRATION 3.38 Closing Entries Journalized
A couple of cautions about preparing closing entries: (1) Avoid unintentionally doubling the
revenue and expense balances rather than zeroing them. (2) Do not close Dividends through the
Income Summary account. Dividends are not expenses, and they are not a factor in
determining net income.
Posting Closing Entries
Illustration 3.39 shows the posting of closing entries and the underlining (ruling) of accounts.
All temporary accounts have zero balances after posting the closing entries. In addition, note that
the balance in Retained Earnings represents the accumulated undistributed earnings of Yazici
Advertising at the end of the accounting period. Yazici reports this amount in the statement of
financial position and as the ending amount in the retained earnings statement. As noted above,
Yazici uses the Income Summary account only in closing. It does not journalize and post
entries to this account during the year.

ILLUSTRATION 3.39 Posting of Closing Entries
As part of the closing process, Yazici totals, balances, and double-underlines the temporary
accounts—revenues, expenses, and dividends—as shown in T-account form in Illustration 3.39. It
does not close the permanent accounts—assets, liabilities, and equity (Share Capital—Ordinary
and Retained Earnings). Instead, Yazici draws a single underline beneath the current period entries
for the permanent accounts. The account balance is then entered below the single underline and is
carried forward to the next period (see, for example, Retained Earnings).
After the closing process, each income statement account and the dividend account have zero
balances and are ready for use in the next accounting period.
Post-Closing Trial Balance
Recall that a trial balance is prepared after posting the regular transactions of the period, and that a
second trial balance (the adjusted trial balance) occurs after posting the adjusting entries. A
company may take a third trial balance after posting the closing entries. The trial balance after

closing is called the post-closing trial balance. The purpose of the post-closing trial balance is
to prove the equality of the permanent account balances that the company carries
forward into the next accounting period. Since all temporary accounts will have zero
balances, the post-closing trial balance will contain only permanent (real)—statement
of financial position—accounts.
Illustration 3.40 shows the post-closing trial balance of Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Yazici Advertising A.Ş.
Post-Closing Trial Balance
October 31, 2022
Account
Debit
Credit
Cash
Accounts Receivable
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Supplies
Prepaid Insurance
Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Notes Payable
Accounts Payable
Unearned Service Revenue
Salaries and Wages Payable
Interest Payable
Share Capital—Ordinary
Retained Earnings
ILLUSTRATION 3.40 Post-Closing Trial Balance
A post-closing trial balance provides evidence that the company has properly journalized and
posted the closing entries. It also shows that the accounting equation is in balance at the end of the
accounting period. However, like the other trial balances, it does not prove that Yazici has recorded
all transactions or that the ledger is correct. For example, the post-closing trial balance will balance
if a transaction is not journalized and posted, or if a transaction is journalized and posted twice.
Reversing Entries—An Optional Step
Some accountants prefer to make a reversing entry at the beginning of the next accounting
period. A reversing entry is the exact opposite of the adjusting entry made in the previous period.
Use of reversing entries is an optional bookkeeping procedure; it is not a required step
in the accounting cycle. Accordingly, we have chosen to cover this topic in Appendix 3B at the
end of the chapter.

What Do the Numbers Mean?
Hey, It’s Complicated
Recent economic volatility has left companies hungering for more timely and uniform
financial information to help them react quickly to fast-changing conditions. As one expert
noted, companies were extremely focused on trying to reduce costs as well as better plan for
the future, but a lot of them discovered that they didn’t have the information they needed and
they didn’t have the ability to get that information. The unsteady recession environment also
made it risky for companies to interrupt their operations to get new systems up to speed.
So what to do? Try to piecemeal upgrades each year or start a major overhaul of their internal
systems? One company, for example, has standardized as many of its systems as possible and
has been steadily upgrading them over the past decade. Acquisitions can also wreak havoc on
reporting systems. This company is choosy about when to standardize for companies it
acquires, but it sometimes has to implement new systems after international deals.
In other situations, a major overhaul is needed. For example, it is common for companies with
a steady stream of acquisitions to have 50 to 70 general ledger systems. In those cases, a
company cannot react well unless its systems are made compatible. As discussed in the
opening story, blockchain technology, which has been proposed to support audited, real-time
financial information, could be part of the solution. So is it the big bang (major overhaul) or
the piecemeal approach? It seems to depend. One thing is certain—good accounting systems
are a necessity. Without one, the risk of failure is high.
Source: Emily Chasan, “The Financial-Data Dilemma,” Wall Street Journal (July 24, 2012), p. B4; and Bryce Welker,
“What Blockchain Means for the Future of Accounting Practices,” Forbes.com (July 12, 2018).
The Accounting Cycle Summarized
A summary of the steps in the accounting cycle shows a logical sequence of the accounting
procedures used during a fiscal period:
1. Enter the transactions of the period in appropriate journals.
2. Post from the journals to the ledger (or ledgers).
3. Prepare an unadjusted trial balance (trial balance).
4. Prepare adjusting journal entries and post to the ledger(s).
5. Prepare a trial balance after adjusting (adjusted trial balance).
6. Prepare the financial statements from the adjusted trial balance.
7. Prepare closing journal entries and post to the ledger(s).
8. Prepare a trial balance after closing (post-closing trial balance).
9. Prepare reversing entries (optional) and post to the ledger(s).
A company normally completes all of these steps in every fiscal period.
Financial Statements for a Merchandising Company

LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Prepare financial statements for a merchandising company.
Yazici Advertising A.Ş. is a service company. In this section, we show a detailed set of financial
statements for a merchandising company, Ciner Cabinets. The financial statements are prepared
from the adjusted trial balance (not shown).
Income Statement
The income statement for Ciner, shown in Illustration 3.41, is self-explanatory. The income
statement classifies amounts into such categories as gross profit on sales, income from operations,
income before income taxes, and net income. Although earnings per share information is required
to be shown on the face of the income statement for a company, we omit this item here; it will be
discussed more fully later in the textbook. (For homework purposes, do not present earnings per
share information unless required to do so.)

Ciner Cabinets
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Net sales
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit on sales
Selling expenses
Salaries and wages expense (sales)
Advertising expense
Total selling expenses
Administrative expenses
Salaries and wages expense (general)
Depreciation expense
Property tax expense
Rent expense
Bad debt expense
Telephone and Internet expense
Insurance expense
Total administrative expenses
Total selling and administrative expenses
Income from operations
Other revenues and gains
Interest revenue
Other expenses and losses
Interest expense
Income before income taxes
Income tax
Net income
ILLUSTRATION 3.41 Income Statement for a Merchandising Company
Retained Earnings Statement
A company may retain the net income earned in the business, or it may distribute it to
shareholders by payment of dividends. In Illustration 3.42, Ciner added the net income earned
during the year to the balance of retained earnings on January 1, thereby increasing the balance of
retained earnings. Deducting dividends of 2,000 results in the ending retained earnings balance of
26,400 on December 31.

Ciner Cabinets
Retained Earnings Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Retained earnings, January 1
Add: Net income
Less: Dividends
Retained earnings, December 31
ILLUSTRATION 3.42 Retained Earnings Statement for a Merchandising Company
Statement of Financial Position
The statement of financial position for Ciner, shown in Illustration 3.43, is a classified statement
of financial position. In the property, plant, and equipment section, Ciner deducts Accumulated
Depreciation—Equipment from the cost of the equipment. The difference represents the book or
carrying value of the equipment.

Ciner Cabinets
Statement of Financial Position
As of December 31, 2022
Assets
Non-current assets
Property, plant, and equipment
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
Total property, plant, and equipment
Current assets
Inventory
Prepaid insurance
Prepaid rent
Notes receivable
Accounts receivable
Interest receivable
Less: Allowance for doubtful accounts
Cash
Total current assets
Total assets
Equity and Liabilities
Equity
Share capital—ordinary, 5.00 par value, issued and outstanding,
10,000 shares
Retained earnings
Total equity
Non-current liabilities
Bonds payable, due June 30, 2027
Current liabilities
Notes payable
Accounts payable
Property taxes payable
Income taxes payable
Total current liabilities
Total liabilities

Total equity and liabilities
ILLUSTRATION 3.43 Statement of Financial Position for a Merchandising Company
Interest receivable, inventory, prepaid insurance, and prepaid rent are included as current assets.
Ciner considers these assets current because they will be converted into cash or used by the
business within a relatively short period of time. Ciner deducts the amount of Allowance for
Doubtful Accounts from the total of accounts, notes, and interest receivable because it estimates
that only 54,800 of 57,800 will be collected.
Note that the equity section for Ciner differs somewhat from the capital section for a
proprietorship. Total equity consists of share capital—ordinary, which is the original investment by
shareholders, and the earnings retained in the business. For homework purposes, unless
instructed otherwise, prepare an unclassified statement of financial position.
The bonds payable, due in 2027, are non-current liabilities. As a result, the statement of financial
position shows the account in a separate section. (The company paid interest on the bonds on
December 31.)
The statement of financial position shows property taxes payable as a current liability because it is
an obligation that is payable within a year. The statement of financial position also shows other
short-term liabilities such as accounts payable.
Closing Entries
Ciner makes closing entries in its general journal as follows.
December 31, 2022
Interest Revenue
Sales Revenue
Income Summary
(To close revenues to Income Summary)
Income Summary
Cost of Goods Sold
Salaries and Wages Expense (sales)
Advertising Expense
Salaries and Wages Expense (general)
Depreciation Expense
Rent Expense
Property Tax Expense
Bad Debt Expense
Telephone and Internet Expense
Insurance Expense
Interest Expense
Income Tax Expense
(To close expenses to Income Summary)
Income Summary
Retained Earnings

(To close Income Summary to Retained Earnings)
Retained Earnings
Dividends
(To close Dividends to Retained Earnings)
APPENDIX 3A Cash-Basis Accounting versus Accrual-Basis
Accounting
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *6
Differentiate the cash basis of accounting from the accrual basis of accounting.
Most companies use accrual-basis accounting: They recognize revenue when the performance
obligation is satisfied and expenses in the period are incurred, without regard to the time of receipt
or payment of cash.
Some small companies and the average individual taxpayer, however, use a strict or modified cash-
basis approach. Under the strict cash basis, companies record revenue only when they receive
cash, and they record expenses only when they disburse cash. Determining income on the cash
basis rests upon collecting revenue and paying expenses. The cash basis ignores two principles: the
revenue recognition principle and the expense recognition principle. Consequently, cash-basis
financial statements are not in conformity with IFRS.
An illustration will help clarify the differences between accrual-basis and cash-basis accounting.
Assume that Eser Contractor signs an agreement to construct a garage for 22,000. In January,
Eser begins construction, incurs costs of 18,000 on credit, and by the end of January delivers a
finished garage to the buyer. In February, Eser collects 22,000 cash from the customer. In March,
Eser pays the 18,000 due the creditors. Illustrations 3A.1 and 3A.2 show the net incomes for
each month under cash-basis accounting and accrual-basis accounting, respectively.
Eser Contractor
Income Statement—Cash Basis
For the Month of
January February
March
Total
Cash receipts
–0–
–0–
Cash payments
–0–
–0–
Net income (loss)
–0–
ILLUSTRATION 3A.1 Income Statement—Cash Basis

Eser Contractor
Income Statement—Accrual Basis
For the Month of
January February March
Total
Revenues
–0–
–0–
Expenses
–0–
–0–
Net income (loss)
 –0–
 –0–
ILLUSTRATION 3A.2 Income Statement—Accrual Basis
For the three months combined, total net income is the same under both cash-basis accounting
and accrual-basis accounting. The difference is in the timing of revenues and expenses. The basis
of accounting also affects the statement of financial position. Illustrations 3A.3 and 3A.4 show
Eser’s statements of financial position at each month-end under the cash basis and the accrual
basis.
Eser Contractor
Statements of Financial Position—Cash Basis
As of
January 31 February 28 March 31
Assets
Cash
–0–
Total assets
–0–
Equity and liabilities
Equity
–0–
Total equity and liabilities
–0–
ILLUSTRATION 3A.3 Statements of Financial Position—Cash Basis
Eser Contractor
Statements of Financial Position—Accrual Basis
As of
January 31 February 28 March 31
Assets
Accounts receivable
–0–
–0–
Cash
–0–
Total assets
Equity and liabilities
Equity
Accounts payable
–0–
Total equity and liabilities
ILLUSTRATION 3A.4 Statements of Financial Position—Accural Basis

Analysis of Eser’s income statements and statements of financial position shows the ways in which
cash-basis accounting is inconsistent with basic accounting theory:
1. The cash basis understates revenues and assets from the construction and delivery of the
garage in January. It ignores the 22,000 of accounts receivable, representing a near-term
future cash inflow.
2. The cash basis understates expenses incurred with the construction of the garage and the
liability outstanding at the end of January. It ignores the 18,000 of accounts payable,
representing a near-term future cash outflow.
3. The cash basis understates equity in January by not recognizing the revenues and the asset
until February. It also overstates equity in February by not recognizing the expenses and the
liability until March.
In short, cash-basis accounting violates the accrual concept underlying financial reporting.
The modified cash basis is a mixture of the cash basis and the accrual basis. It is based on the
strict cash basis but with modifications that have substantial support, such as capitalizing and
depreciating plant assets or recording inventory. This method is often followed by professional
services firms (doctors, lawyers, accountants, consultants) and by retail, real estate, and
agricultural operations.1
Conversion from Cash Basis to Accrual Basis
Not infrequently, companies want to convert a cash basis or a modified cash basis set of financial
statements to the accrual basis for presentation to investors and creditors. To illustrate this
conversion, assume that Dr. L. Liwan, like many small business owners, keeps her accounting
records on a cash basis. In the year 2022, Dr. Liwan, a dentist, received 300,000 from her patients
and paid 170,000 for operating expenses, resulting in an excess of cash receipts over
disbursements of 130,000 ( 300,000 – 170,000). At January 1 and December 31, 2022, she has
accounts receivable, unearned service revenue, accrued liabilities, and prepaid expenses as shown
in Illustration 3A.5.
January 1, 2022 December 31, 2022
Accounts receivable
Unearned service revenue
–0–
Accrued liabilities
Prepaid expenses
ILLUSTRATION 3A.5 Financial Information Related to Dr. L. Liwan
Service Revenue Computation
To convert the amount of cash received from patients to service revenue on an accrual basis, we
must consider changes in accounts receivable and unearned service revenue during the year.
Accounts receivable at the beginning of the year represents revenues that are collected this year.
Ending accounts receivable indicates revenues that are not yet collected. Therefore, to compute
revenue on an accrual basis, we subtract beginning accounts receivable and add ending accounts
receivable, as the formula in Illustration 3A.6 shows.

Cash Receipts
from Customers
{ −
Beginning Accounts Receivable
+
Ending Accounts Receivable
} =
Revenue
on an
Accrual Basis
ILLUSTRATION 3A.6 Conversion of Cash Receipts to Revenue—Accounts Receivable
Similarly, beginning unearned service revenue represents cash received last year for services to be
performed this year. Ending unearned service revenue results from collections this year for
services to be performed next year. Therefore, to compute revenue on an accrual basis, we add
beginning unearned service revenue and subtract ending unearned service revenue, as the formula
in Illustration 3A.7 shows.
Cash Receipts
from Customers
⎧
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪
⎨
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪
⎩
+
Beginning Unearned
Service Revenue
−
Ending Unearned
Service Revenue
⎫
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪
⎬
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪
⎭
=
Revenue
on an
Accrual Basis
ILLUSTRATION 3A.7 Conversion of Cash Receipts to Revenue—Unearned Service
Revenue
Therefore, for Dr. Liwan’s dental practice, to convert cash collected from customers to service
revenue on an accrual basis, we would make the computations shown in Illustration 3A.8.
Cash receipts from customers
− Beginning accounts receivable
+ Ending accounts receivable
+ Beginning unearned service revenue
–0–
− Ending unearned service revenue
Service revenue (accrual)
ILLUSTRATION 3A.8 Conversion of Cash Receipts to Service Revenue
Operating Expense Computation
To convert cash paid for operating expenses during the year to operating expenses on an accrual
basis, we must consider changes in prepaid expenses and accrued liabilities. First, we need to
recognize as this year’s expenses the amount of beginning prepaid expenses. (The cash payment for
these occurred last year.) Therefore, to arrive at operating expense on an accrual basis, we add the
beginning prepaid expenses balance to cash paid for operating expenses.
Conversely, ending prepaid expenses result from cash payments made this year for expenses to be
reported next year. (Under the accrual basis, Dr. Liwan would have deferred recognizing these
payments as expenses until a future period.) To convert these cash payments to operating expenses
on an accrual basis, we deduct ending prepaid expenses from cash paid for expenses, as the formula
in Illustration 3A.9 shows.

Cash Paid for
Operating Expenses
{ +
Beginning Prepaid Expenses
−
Ending Prepaid Expenses
} =
Expenses
on an
Accrual Basis
ILLUSTRATION 3A.9 Conversion of Cash Payments to Expenses—Prepaid Expenses
Similarly, beginning accrued liabilities result from expenses that require cash payments this year.
Ending accrued liabilities relate to expenses that have not been paid. To arrive at expense on an
accrual basis, we deduct beginning accrued liabilities and add ending accrued liabilities to cash paid
for expenses, as the formula in Illustration 3A.10 shows.
Cash Paid for
Operating Expenses
{ −
Beginning Accrued Liabilities
+
Ending Accrued Liabilities
} =
Expenses
on an
Accrual Basis
ILLUSTRATION 3A.10 Conversion of Cash Payments to Expenses—Accrued
Liabilities
Therefore, for Dr. Liwan’s dental practice, to convert cash paid for operating expenses to operating
expenses on an accrual basis, we would make the computations shown in Illustration 3A.11.
Cash paid for operating expenses
+ Beginning prepaid expense
− Ending prepaid expense
− Beginning accrued liabilities
+ Ending accrued liabilities
Operating expenses (accrual)
ILLUSTRATION 3A.11 Conversion of Cash Paid to Operating Expenses
This entire conversion can be completed in worksheet form, as shown in Illustration 3A.12.

ILLUSTRATION 3A.12 Conversion of Statement of Cash Receipts and Disbursements
to Income Statement
Using this approach, we adjust collections and disbursements on a cash basis to revenue and
expense on an accrual basis, to arrive at accrual net income. In any conversion from the cash basis
to the accrual basis, depreciation or amortization is an additional expense in arriving at net income
on an accrual basis.
Theoretical Weaknesses of the Cash Basis
The cash basis reports exactly when cash is received and when cash is disbursed. To many people
that information represents something concrete. Isn’t cash what it is all about? Does it make sense
to invent something, design, produce, market and sell it, if you aren’t going to get cash for it in the
end? Many frequently say, “Cash is the real bottom line,” and also, “Cash is the oil that lubricates
the economy.” If so, then what is the merit of accrual accounting?
Today’s economy is considerably more lubricated by credit than by cash. The accrual basis, not the
cash basis, recognizes all aspects of the credit phenomenon. Investors, creditors, and other
decision-makers seek timely information about a company’s future cash flows. Accrual-basis
accounting provides this information by reporting the cash inflows and outflows associated with
earnings activities as soon as these companies can estimate these cash flows with an acceptable
degree of certainty. Receivables and payables are forecasters of future cash inflows and outflows.
In other words, accrual-basis accounting aids in predicting future cash flows by reporting

transactions and other events with cash consequences at the time the transactions and events
occur, rather than when the cash is received and paid.
APPENDIX 3B Using Reversing Entries
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *7
Identify adjusting entries that may be reversed.
Use of reversing entries simplifies the recording of transactions in the next accounting period. The
use of reversing entries, however, does not change the amounts reported in the financial
statements for the previous period.
Illustration of Reversing Entries—Accruals
A company most often uses reversing entries to reverse two types of adjusting entries: accrued
revenues and accrued expenses. To illustrate the optional use of reversing entries for accrued
expenses, we use the following transaction and adjustment data.
1. October 24 (initial salaries and wages entry): Paid 4,000 of salaries and wages incurred
between October 10 and October 24.
2. October 31 (adjusting entry): Incurred salaries and wages between October 25 and October 31
of 1,200, to be paid in the November 8 payroll.
3. November 8 (subsequent salaries and wages entry): Paid salaries and wages of 2,500. Of this
amount, 1,200 applied to accrued salaries and wages payable at October 31 and 1,300 to
salaries and wages payable for November 1 through November 8.
Illustration 3B.1 shows the comparative entries.

REVERSING ENTRIES NOT USED
REVERSING ENTRIES USED
Initial Salary Entry
Oct.
Salaries and Wages Expense 4,000
Oct.
Salaries and Wages Expense 4,000
Cash
Cash
Adjusting Entry
Oct.
Salaries and Wages Expense 1,200
Oct.
Salaries and Wages Expense 1,200
Salaries and Wages
Payable
Salaries and Wages
Payable
Closing Entry
Oct.
Income Summary
Oct.
Income Summary
Salaries and Wages
Expense
Salaries and Wages
Expense
Reversing Entry
Nov. 1 No entry is made.
Nov. 1 Salaries and Wages Payable
Salaries and Wages
Expense
Subsequent Salary Entry
Nov. 8 Salaries and Wages Payable
Nov. 8 Salaries and Wages Expense 2,500
Salaries and Wages Expense 1,300
Cash
Cash
ILLUSTRATION 3B.1 Comparison of Entries for Accruals, with and without
Reversing Entries
The comparative entries show that the first three entries are the same whether or not the company
uses reversing entries. The last two entries differ. The November 1 reversing entry eliminates the 
1,200 balance in Salaries and Wages Payable, created by the October 31 adjusting entry. The
reversing entry also creates a 1,200 credit balance in the Salaries and Wages Expense account. As
you know, it is unusual for an expense account to have a credit balance. However, the balance is
correct in this instance. Why? Because the company will debit the entire amount of the first
salaries and wages payment in the new accounting period to Salaries and Wages Expense. This
debit eliminates the credit balance. The resulting debit balance in the expense account will equal
the salaries and wages expense incurred in the new accounting period ( 1,300 in this example).
When a company makes reversing entries, it debits all cash payments of expenses to
the related expense account. This means that on November 8 (and every payday) the company
debits Salaries and Wages Expense for the amount paid without regard to the existence of any
accrued salaries and wages payable. Repeating the same entry simplifies the recording process in
an accounting system.
Illustration of Reversing Entries—Deferrals
Up to this point, we assumed the recording of all deferrals as prepaid expense or unearned revenue.
In some cases, though, a company records deferrals directly in expense or revenue accounts. When
this occurs, a company may also reverse deferrals.

To illustrate the use of reversing entries for prepaid expenses, we use the following transaction and
adjustment data.
1. December 10 (initial entry): Purchased 20,000 of supplies with cash.
2. December 31 (adjusting entry): Determined that 5,000 of supplies are on hand.
Illustration 3B.2 shows the comparative entries.
REVERSING ENTRIES NOT USED
REVERSING ENTRIES USED
Initial Purchase of Supplies Entry
Dec. 10
Supplies
Dec. 10 Supplies Expense
Cash
Cash
Adjusting Entry
Dec. 31
Supplies Expense
Dec. 31 Supplies
Supplies
Supplies Expense
Closing Entry
Dec. 31
Income Summary
Dec. 31 Income Summary
Supplies Expense
Supplies Expense
Reversing Entry
Jan. 1
No entry
Jan. 1
Supplies Expense
Supplies
ILLUSTRATION 3B.2 Comparison of Entries for Deferrals, with and without
Reversing Entries
After the adjusting entry on December 31 (regardless of whether using reversing entries), the asset
account Supplies shows a balance of 5,000, and Supplies Expense shows a balance of 15,000. If
the company initially debits Supplies Expense when it purchases the supplies, it then makes a
reversing entry to return to the expense account the cost of unconsumed supplies. The company
then continues to debit Supplies Expense for additional purchases of office supplies during the
next period.
Deferrals are generally entered in real accounts (assets and liabilities), thus making reversing
entries unnecessary. This approach is used because it is advantageous for items that a company
needs to apportion over several periods (e.g., supplies and parts inventories). However, for other
items that do not follow this regular pattern and that may or may not involve two or more periods,
a company ordinarily enters them initially in revenue or expense accounts. The revenue and
expense accounts may not require adjusting, and the company thus systematically closes them to
Income Summary.
Using the nominal accounts adds consistency to the accounting system. It also makes the recording
more efficient, particularly when a large number of such transactions occur during the year. For
example, the bookkeeper knows to expense invoice items (except for capital asset acquisitions). He
or she need not worry whether an item will result in a prepaid expense at the end of the period,
because the company will make adjustments at the end of the period.
Summary of Reversing Entries
We summarize guidelines for reversing entries as follows.

1. All accruals should be reversed.
2. All deferrals for which a company debited or credited the original cash transaction to an
expense or revenue account should be reversed.
3. Adjusting entries for depreciation and bad debts are not reversed.
Recognize that reversing entries do not have to be used. Therefore, some accountants avoid them
entirely.
APPENDIX 3C Using a Worksheet: The Accounting Cycle
Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVE *8
Prepare a 10-column worksheet.
In this appendix, we provide an additional illustration of the end-of-period steps in the accounting
cycle and illustrate the use of a worksheet (usually an electronic spreadsheet) in this process.
Using a worksheet often facilitates the end-of-period (monthly, quarterly, or annually)
accounting and reporting process. Use of a worksheet helps a company prepare the financial
statements on a more timely basis. How? With a worksheet, a company need not wait until it
journalizes and posts the adjusting and closing entries.
A company can prepare a worksheet either on columnar paper or within a computer spreadsheet.
In either form, a company uses the worksheet to adjust account balances and to prepare financial
statements.
The worksheet does not replace the financial statements. Instead, it is an informal device
for accumulating and sorting information needed for the financial statements. Completing the
worksheet provides considerable assurance that a company properly handled all of the details
related to the end-of-period accounting and statement preparation. The 10-column worksheet in
Illustration 3C.1 provides columns for the first trial balance, adjustments, adjusted trial balance,
income statement, and statement of financial position.

ILLUSTRATION 3C.1 Use of a Worksheet
Worksheet Columns
Trial Balance Columns
Ciner Cabinets, shown in Illustration 3C.1, obtains data for the trial balance from its ledger
balances at December 31. The amount for Inventory, 40,000, is the year-end inventory amount,
which results from the application of a perpetual inventory system.
Adjustments Columns
After Ciner enters all adjustment data on the worksheet, it establishes the equality of the
adjustment columns. It then extends the balances in all accounts to the adjusted trial balance
columns.

Adjustments Entered on the Worksheet
Items (a) through (g) below serve as the basis for the adjusting entries made in the worksheet for
Ciner shown in Illustration 3C.1.
a. Depreciation of equipment at the rate of 10% per year based on original cost of 67,000.
b. Estimated bad debt expense of $1,000 to bring the Allowance for Doubtful Accounts to a
balance of $3,000.
c. Insurance expired during the year 360.
d. Interest accrued on notes receivable as of December 31, 800.
e. The Rent Expense account contains 500 rent paid in advance, which is applicable to next
year.
f. Property taxes accrued December 31, 2,000.
g. Income taxes payable estimated 3,440.
The adjusting entries shown on the December 31, 2022, worksheet are as follows.
(a)
Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
(b)
Bad Debt Expense
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
(c)
Insurance Expense
Prepaid Insurance
(d)
Interest Receivable
Interest Revenue
(e)
Prepaid Rent
Rent Expense
(f)
Property Tax Expense
Property Taxes Payable
(g)
Income Tax Expense
Income Taxes Payable
Ciner Cabinets transfers the adjusting entries to the Adjustments columns of the worksheet, often
designating each by letter. The trial balance lists any new accounts resulting from the adjusting
entries, as illustrated on the worksheet. (For example, see the accounts listed in rows 32 through
40 in Illustration 3C.1.) Ciner then totals and balances the Adjustments columns.
Adjusted Trial Balance

The adjusted trial balance shows the balance of all accounts after adjustment at the end of the
accounting period. For example, Ciner adds the 2,000 shown opposite Allowance for Doubtful
Accounts in the Trial Balance Cr. column to the 1,000 in the Adjustments Cr. column. The
company then extends the 3,000 total to the Adjusted Trial Balance Cr. column. Similarly, Ciner
reduces the 900 debit opposite Prepaid Insurance by the 360 credit in the Adjustments column.
The result, 540, is shown in the Adjusted Trial Balance Dr. column.
Income Statement and Statement of Financial Position Columns
Ciner extends all the debit items in the Adjusted Trial Balance columns into the Income Statement
or Statement of Financial Position columns to the right. It similarly extends all the credit items.
The next step is to total the Income Statement columns. Ciner needs the amount of net income or
loss for the period to balance the debit and credit columns. The net income of 12,200 is shown in
the Income Statement Dr. column because revenues exceeded expenses by that amount.
Ciner then balances the Income Statement columns. The company also enters the net income of 
12,200 in the Statement of Financial Position Cr. column as an increase in retained earnings.
Preparing Financial Statements from a Worksheet
The worksheet provides the information needed for preparation of the financial statements
without reference to the ledger or other records. In addition, the worksheet sorts that data into
appropriate columns, which facilitates the preparation of the statements. The financial statements
of Ciner Cabinet are shown in Chapter 3 (Illustrations 3.41, 3.42, and 3.43).
Review and Practice
Key Terms Review
account
accounting cycle
accounting information system
*accrual-basis accounting
accrued expenses
accrued revenues
adjusted trial balance
adjusting entries
book value (carrying value)
chart of accounts
closing entries
closing process
contra asset account
credit
debit
depreciation

double-entry accounting
event
financial statements
general journal
general ledger
income statement
journal
journalizing
ledger
*modified cash basis
nominal accounts
post-closing trial balance
posting
prepaid expenses
real and nominal accounts
reversing entries
special journals
statement of cash flows
statement of financial position
statement of retained earnings
*strict cash basis
subsidiary ledger
T-account
transaction
trial balance
unearned revenues
*worksheet
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe the basic accounting information system.
Understanding the following eleven terms helps in understanding key accounting concepts: (1)
event, (2) transaction, (3) account, (4) real and nominal accounts, (5) ledger, (6) journal, (7)
posting, (8) trial balance, (9) adjusting entries, (10) financial statements, and (11) closing entries.
Using double-entry rules, the left side of any account is the debit side; the right side is the credit
side. All asset and expense accounts are increased on the left or debit side and decreased on the
right or credit side. Conversely, all liability and revenue accounts are increased on the right or
credit side and decreased on the left or debit side. Equity accounts, Share Capital—Ordinary and
Retained Earnings, are increased on the credit side. Dividends is increased on the debit side.

The basic steps in the accounting cycle are (1) identifying and measuring transactions and
other events; (2) journalizing; (3) posting; (4) preparing an unadjusted trial balance; (5) making
adjusting entries; (6) preparing an adjusted trial balance; (7) preparing financial statements; and
(8) closing.
2 Record and summarize basic transactions.
The simplest journal form chronologically lists transactions and events expressed in terms of
debits and credits to particular accounts. The items entered in a general journal must be
transferred (posted) to the general ledger. Companies should prepare an unadjusted trial balance at
the end of a given period after they have recorded the entries in the journal and posted them to the
ledger.
3 Identify and prepare adjusting entries.
Adjustments achieve a proper recognition of revenues and expenses, so as to determine net income
for the current period and to achieve an accurate statement of end-of-the-period balances in assets,
liabilities, and equity accounts. The major types of adjusting entries are deferrals (prepaid expenses
and unearned revenues) and accruals (accrued revenues and accrued expenses).
4 Prepare financial statements from the adjusted trial balance and prepare closing
entries.
Companies can prepare financial statements directly from the adjusted trial balance. The income
statement is prepared from the revenue and expense accounts. The retained earnings statement is
prepared from the retained earnings account, dividends, and net income (or net loss). The
statement of financial position is prepared from the asset, liability, and equity accounts.
In the closing process, the company transfers all of the revenue and expense account balances
(income statement items) to a clearing account called Income Summary, which is used only at the
end of the fiscal year. Revenues and expenses are matched in the Income Summary account. The
net result of this matching represents the net income or net loss for the period. That amount is
then transferred to an equity account (Retained Earnings for a company and capital accounts for
proprietorships and partnerships).
5 Prepare financial statements for a merchandising company.
The financial statements for a merchandiser differ from those for a service company, as a
merchandiser must account for gross profit on sales. The accounting cycle, however, is performed
the same way.
*6 Differentiate the cash basis of accounting from the accrual basis of accounting.
The cash basis of accounting records revenues when cash is received and expenses when cash is
paid. Cash-basis accounting is not in conformity with IFRS. The accrual basis recognizes revenue
when the performance obligation is satisfied and expenses in the period incurred, without regard to
the time of the receipt or payment of cash. Accrual-basis accounting is theoretically preferable
because it provides information about future cash inflows and outflows associated with earnings
activities as soon as companies can estimate these cash flows with an acceptable degree of
certainty.

*7 Identify adjusting entries that may be reversed.
Reversing entries are most often used to reverse two types of adjusting entries: accrued revenues
and accrued expenses. Deferrals may also be reversed if the initial entry to record the transaction is
made to an expense or revenue account.
*8 Prepare a 10-column worksheet.
The 10-column worksheet provides columns for the first trial balance, adjustments, adjusted trial
balance, income statement, and statement of financial position. The worksheet does not replace the
financial statements. Instead, it is an informal device for accumulating and sorting information
needed for the financial statements.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions, and a
full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Nalezny Advertising was founded by Casey Hayward in January 2012. Presented below are both
the adjusted and unadjusted trial balances as of December 31, 2022.
Nalezny Advertising
Trial Balance
December 31, 2022
Unadjusted
Adjusted
Dr.
Cr.
Dr.
Cr.
Cash
Accounts Receivable
Supplies
Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
Accounts Payable
Unearned Advertising Revenue
Salaries and Wages Payable
–0–
Share Capital—Ordinary
Retained Earnings
Advertising Revenue
Salaries and Wages Expense
Depreciation Expense
Supplies Expense
Rent Expense

Instructions
a. Journalize the annual adjusting entries that were made.
b. Prepare an income statement for the year ending December 31, 2022, and a statement of
financial position at December 31.
c. Describe the remaining steps in the accounting cycle to be completed by Nalezny for 2022.
Solution
a. 
Dec. 31 Accounts Receivable
Advertising Revenue
31 Unearned Advertising Revenue
Advertising Revenue
31 Supplies Expense
Supplies
31 Depreciation Expense
Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment
31 Salaries and Wages Expense
Salaries and Wages Payable
b. 
Nalezny Advertising
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2022
Revenues
Advertising revenue
Expenses
Salaries and wages expense
Depreciation expense
Rent expense
Supplies expense
Total expenses
Net income
Nalezny Advertising
Statement of Financial Position
December 31, 2022
Assets
Equipment
Less: Accumulated depreciation—equipment
Supplies
Accounts receivable
Cash
Total assets

Equity and Liabilities
Equity
Share capital—ordinary
Retained earnings
40,600*
Total equity
Liabilities
Accounts payable
Unearned advertising revenue
Salaries and wage payable
Total liabilities
Total equity and liabilities
*Retained earnings, Jan. 1, 2022 € 4,800
Add: Net income
Retained earnings, Dec. 31, 2022 €40,600
c. Following preparation of financial statements (part (b)), Nalezny would prepare closing entries
to reduce the temporary accounts to zero. Some companies prepare a post-closing trial balance
and reversing entries.
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities, and
many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s online
courseware.
Note: All asterisked Questions, Exercises, and Problems relate to material in the appendices to the
chapter.
Questions
1. Give an example of a transaction that results in:
a. a decrease in an asset and a decrease in a liability.
b. a decrease in one asset and an increase in another asset.
c. a decrease in one liability and an increase in another liability.
2. Do the following events represent business transactions? Explain your answer in each case.
a. A computer is purchased on account.
b. A customer returns merchandise and is given credit on account.
c. A prospective employee is interviewed.
d. The owner of the business withdraws cash from the business for personal use.
e. Merchandise is ordered for delivery next month.
3. Name the accounts debited and credited for each of the following transactions.
a. Billing a customer for work done.
b. Receipt of cash from customer on account.

c. Purchase of office supplies on account.
d. Purchase of 15 gallons of gasoline for the delivery truck.
4. Why are revenue and expense accounts called temporary or nominal accounts?
5. Andrea Pafko, a fellow student, contends that the double-entry system means that each
transaction must be recorded twice. Is Andrea correct? Explain.
6. Is it necessary that a trial balance be prepared periodically? What purpose does it serve?
7. Indicate whether each of the items below is a real or nominal account and whether it appears in
the statement of financial position or the income statement.
a. Prepaid Rent.
b. Salaries and Wages Payable.
c. Inventory.
d. Accumulated Depreciation—Equipment.
e. Equipment.
f. Service Revenue.
g. Salaries and Wages Expense.
h. Supplies.
8. Employees are paid every Saturday for the preceding work week. If a statement of financial
position is prepared on Wednesday, December 31, what does the amount of salaries and wages
earned by employees the first three days of the week (12/29, 12/30, 12/31) represent? Explain.
9. (a) How do the components of revenues and expenses differ between a merchandising company
and a service enterprise? (b) Explain the income measurement process of a merchandising
company.
10. What differences are there between the trial balance before closing and the trial balance after
closing with respect to the following accounts?
a. Accounts Payable.
b. Expense accounts.
c. Revenue accounts.
d. Retained Earnings account.
e. Cash.
11. What are adjusting entries, and why are they necessary?
12. What are closing entries, and why are they necessary?
13. Carlo Avardo, maintenance supervisor for Lisbon Insurance Co., has purchased a riding
lawnmower and accessories to be used in maintaining the grounds around company headquarters.
He has sent the following information to the accounting department.
Cost of mower and accessories €4,000 Date purchased
7/1/22
Estimated useful life
5 yrs
Monthly salary of groundskeeper €1,100
Residual value
€0
Estimated annual fuel cost

Compute the amount of depreciation expense (related to the mower and accessories) that should
be reported on Lisbon’s December 31, 2022, income statement. Assume straight-line depreciation.
14. Chen Enterprises made the following entry on December 31, 2022.
Interest Expense
Interest Payable
(To record interest expense due on loan from Hibernia Bank)
What entry would Hibernia Bank make regarding its outstanding loan to Chen Enterprises?
Explain why this must be the case.
*15. Distinguish between cash-basis accounting and accrual-basis accounting. Why is accrual-basis
accounting acceptable for most business enterprises and the cash-basis unacceptable in the
preparation of an income statement and a statement of financial position?
*16. When salaries and wages expense for the year on an accrual basis is computed, why are
beginning accrued salaries and wages subtracted from, and ending accrued salaries and wages
added to, salaries and wages paid during the year?
*17. Explain the distinction between accounting using strict cash-basis accounting and a modified
cash basis.
*18. What are reversing entries, and why are they used?
*19. “A worksheet is a permanent accounting record, and its use is required in the accounting
cycle.” Do you agree? Explain.
Brief Exercises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 9
Compare the accounting information systems under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
As indicated in this chapter, companies must have an effective accounting system. In the wake of
accounting scandals at such U.S. companies as Sunbeam, Rite-Aid, Xerox, and WorldCom,
U.S. lawmakers demanded higher assurance on the quality of accounting reports. Since the passage
of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), companies that trade on U.S. exchanges are required to place
renewed focus on their accounting systems to ensure accurate reporting.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
accounting information systems.
Similarities
International companies use the same set of procedures and records to keep track of
transaction data. Thus, the material in Chapter 3 dealing with the account, general rules of
debit and credit, and steps in the recording process—the journal, ledger, and chart of accounts
—is the same under both U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Transaction analysis is the same under U.S. GAAP and IFRS but, as you will see in later
chapters, different standards sometimes impact how transactions are recorded.
Both the FASB and IASB go beyond the basic definitions provided in this textbook for the key
elements of financial statements, that is, assets, liabilities, equity, revenues, and expenses.
A trial balance under U.S. GAAP follows the same format as shown in the textbook. As shown
in the textbook, currency signs are typically used only in the trial balance and the financial
statements. The same practice is followed under U.S. GAAP.
Differences
Rules for accounting for specific events sometimes differ across countries. For example,
European companies rely less on historical cost and more on fair value than U.S. companies.

Despite the differences, the double-entry accounting system is the basis of accounting systems
worldwide.
Internal controls are a system of checks and balances designed to prevent and detect fraud and
errors. While most public U.S. companies have these systems in place, many non-U.S.
companies have never completely documented them nor had an independent auditor attest to
their effectiveness. Both of these actions are required under SOX. Enhanced internal control
standards apply only to large public companies listed on U.S. exchanges.
About the Numbers
As discussed, IFRS has been adopted in some form by over 120 countries around the world. One of
the most important world markets (U.S.) is not yet on board. Whether to adopt IFRS in the United
States has been debated over the past several years. In deciding whether the United States should
adopt IFRS, some of the issues the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) said should be
considered are:
Whether IFRS is sufficiently developed and consistent in application.
Whether the IASB is sufficiently independent.
Whether IFRS is established for the benefit of investors.
The issues involved in educating investors about IFRS.
The impact of a switch to IFRS on U.S. laws and regulations.
The impact on companies, including changes to their accounting systems, contractual
arrangements, company governance, and litigation.
The issues involved in educating accountants, so they can prepare statements under IFRS.
To evaluate these issues, the U.S. SEC asked its staff to study IFRS adoption and identify possible
consequences for adoption in the United States. The U.S. SEC Staff Report on IFRS Work Plan
(available at the SEC website) reported the following key findings:
There is uneven application of IFRS around the world, which results in comparability
concerns.
There is uneven auditing and enforcement of IFRS around the world.
Funding and independence of the IASB as the international standard-setter continues to be a
challenge.
Cost of adopting IFRS for regulation (IRS, banking, and insurance regulators) will be
significant.
There is uncertainty whether investors and others who use financial statements are ready to
use IFRS statements.
Based on these findings, it appears that required adoption of IFRS in the United States is off the
table. Furthermore, the U.S. SEC Chief Accountant has rejected optional adoption of IFRS but has
floated the idea of optional IFRS proforma disclosures. The U.S. SEC staff has sketched out a path
from convergence to a collaboration model. That is, the U.S. SEC has encouraged the IASB and
FASB to work to converge to high-quality standards in other areas (now that major projects have
been completed). Under this collaboration model, the FASB and other national standard-setters are
collaborating to find a multilateral approach to providing input to the IASB (Accounting Standards
Advisory Forum (ASAF), and other forums)—still with the goal of limiting differences in IFRS and
U.S. GAAP.

On the Horizon
High-quality international accounting requires both high-quality accounting standards and high-
quality auditing. Similar to the convergence of U.S. GAAP and IFRS, there is a movement to
improve international auditing standards. The International Auditing and Assurance Standards
Board (IAASB) functions as an independent standard-setting body. It works to establish high-
quality auditing and assurance and quality-control standards throughout the world. Whether the
IAASB adopts internal control provisions similar to those in SOX remains to be seen. You can
follow developments in the international audit arena at the International Federation of
Accountants website.
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. Which statement is correct regarding U.S. GAAP?
a. U.S. GAAP reverses the rules of debits and credits, that is, debits are on the right and credits
are on the left.
b. U.S. GAAP uses the same process for recording transactions as IFRS.
c. The chart of accounts under U.S. GAAP is different because revenues follow assets.
d. None of the above statements are correct.
2. The expanded accounting equation under U.S. GAAP is as follows:
a. Assets = Liabilities + Common Stock – Retained Earnings – Dividends + Revenues –
Expenses.
b. Assets + Liabilities = Common Stock + Retained Earnings – Dividends + Revenues –
Expenses.
c. Assets = Liabilities + Common Stock + Retained Earnings – Dividends + Revenues –
Expenses.
d. Assets = Liabilities + Common Stock – Retained Earnings – Dividends – Revenues –
Expenses.
3. A trial balance:
a. is the same under U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
b. proves that transactions are recorded correctly.
c. proves that all transactions have been recorded.
d. will not balance if a correct journal entry is posted twice.
4. One difference between U.S. GAAP and IFRS is that:
a. IFRS uses accrual-accounting concepts, and U.S. GAAP uses primarily the cash basis of
accounting.
b. U.S. GAAP uses a different posting process than IFRS.
c. IFRS uses more fair value measurements than U.S. GAAP.
d. the limitations of a trial balance are different between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
5. The general policy for using proper currency signs (dollar, yen, pound, etc.) is the same for both
U.S. GAAP and this textbook. This policy is as follows:

a. Currency signs only appear in ledgers and journal entries.
b. Currency signs are only shown in the trial balance.
c. Currency signs are shown for all compound journal entries.
d. Currency signs are shown in trial balances and financial statements.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP3.1 Are all international companies subject to the same internal control standards? Explain.
GAAP3.2 What are some of the consequences of international differences in internal control
standards?
GAAP3.3 Briefly describe the key elements of international auditing convergence.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. b 2. c 3. a 4. c 5. d
Note
1 Companies in the following situations might use a cash or modified cash basis.
(1) A company that is primarily interested in cash flows (for example, a group of physicians that
distributes cash-basis earnings for salaries and bonuses).
(2) A company that has a limited number of financial statement users (small, closely held
company with little or no debt).
(3) A company that has operations that are relatively straightforward (small amounts of
inventory, long-term assets, or long-term debt).
Sources: L. Carlozo, “What Is Blockchain?” Journal of Accountancy (July 1, 2017); “Prestigious Accounting Association Takes
on Blockchain Technology,” Forbes.com (October 2018); Deloitte, Blockchain Technology: A Game Changer? (2016); “PwC Has
an Answer for the Blockchain: Audit It,” Wall Street Journal (March 16, 2018).