CHAPTER 9
Inventories: Additional Valuation Issues
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
1. Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
2. Identify other inventory valuation issues.
3. Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
4. Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.
5. Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
This chapter also includes numerous conceptual discussions that are
integral to the topics presented here.
PREVIEW OF CHAPTER 9
As the following opening story indicates, information on inventories helps to predict
financial performance—in particular, profits. In this chapter, we discuss some of the
valuation and estimation concepts that companies use to develop relevant inventory
information. The content and organization of the chapter are as follows.
Not What It Seems to Be
Investors need comparable information about inventory when evaluating a retailer’s
financial statements. For a complete assessment, investors need to determine what
inventory method a retailer is using (e.g., FIFO, average-cost, or a combination of methods)
and then adjust the company’s financial information to a common method. That is a good
start. Subsequently, investors compute relevant metrics about the company such as
inventory turnover, number of days sales in inventory, gross profit rate, and liquidity
measures such as the current ratio.

These calculations are critical. Inventory is a significant component of working capital, and
the gross profit resulting from sales of inventory is often viewed as the most important
income component in measuring a retailer’s progress. For example, consider the financial
statements of a typical grocery retailer, Ahold Delhaize (NLD/BEL), shown in the
following table. Inventory comprises over 36 percent of current assets, and gross profit
represents 27 percent of sales revenue.
Ahold Delhaize (in millions)
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position Consolidated Income Statement
Current Assets
Sales revenue
Other current assets
€ 765 Cost of sales
Inventories
3,196 Gross profit
Receivables
Cash and cash equivalents
3,122 Net income
Total current assets
Analysis can be conducted based on these numbers. However, there are often still questions
about the reliability of the information reported in the financial statements. That is,
subjective estimates are involved because of the possible impairment of the inventory.
As indicated in the following table, Ahold’s disclosures of its subjective estimates concerning
the measurement and valuation of inventory (related to markdowns and inventory losses)
could have a significant impact on an investor’s ability to compare inventory levels (and their
impact on gross profit) at Ahold over time and relative to other retailers.
Thus, inventory balances may not be what they seem, not only due to the cost flow
assumptions (e.g., FIFO/weighted-average) you learned about in Chapter 8 but also due to
significant markdowns and losses that you will learn about in this chapter.
Review and Practice
Go to the Review and Practice section at the end of the chapter for a targeted
summary review and practice problem with solution. Multiple-choice questions with
annotated solutions, as well as additional exercises and practice problem with solutions,
are also available online.

Lower-of-Cost-or-Net Realizable Value (LCNRV)
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 1
Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
Inventories are recorded at their cost. However, if inventory declines in value below its
original cost, a major departure from the historical cost principle occurs. Whatever the
reason for a decline—obsolescence, price-level changes, or damaged goods—a company
should write down the inventory to net realizable value to report this loss. A company
abandons the historical cost principle when the future utility (revenue-
producing ability) of the asset drops below its original cost.
Net Realizable Value
Recall that cost is the acquisition price of inventory computed using one of the historical
cost-based methods—specific identification, average-cost, or FIFO. The term net realizable
value (NRV) refers to the net amount that a company expects to realize from the sale of
inventory. Specifically, net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the normal course
of business less estimated costs to complete and to make a sale. [1] (See the Authoritative
Literature References section near the end of the chapter.)
To illustrate, assume that Mander AG has unfinished inventory with a cost of €950, a sales
value of €1,000, estimated cost of completion of €50, and estimated selling costs of €200.
Mander’s net realizable value is computed as shown in Illustration 9.1.
Inventory value—unfinished
Less: Estimated cost of completion € 50
Estimated cost to sell
Net realizable value
ILLUSTRATION 9.1 Computation of Net Realizable Value
Mander reports inventory on its statement of financial position at €750. In its income
statement, Mander reports a Loss on Inventory Write-Down of €200 (€950 − €750). A
departure from cost is justified because inventories should not be reported at amounts
higher than their expected realization from sale or use. In addition, a company like Mander
should charge the loss of utility against revenues in the period in which the loss occurs, not
in the period of sale.
Companies therefore report their inventories at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable
value (LCNRV) at each reporting date. Illustration 9.2 shows how two companies
indicate measurement at LCNRV.

Nokia (FIN)
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using
standard cost, which approximates actual cost on a FIFO basis. Net realizable value is the
amount that can be realized from the sale of the inventory in the normal course of business
after allowing for the costs of realization. In addition to the cost of materials and direct
labor, an appropriate proportion of production overhead is included in the inventory values.
An allowance is recorded for excess inventory and obsolescence based on the lower-of-cost-
or-net realizable value.
Carrefour Group (FRA)
In accordance with IAS 2 – Inventories, goods inventories and the inventories of the
property development business (properties under construction) are measured at the lower
of cost and net realisable value.
The cost of goods inventories corresponds to the latest purchase price plus all related
expenses. This method is appropriate given the rapid inventory turnover, and the resulting
values are close to those obtained by the first in-first out (FIFO) method. The cost of goods
inventories includes all components of the purchase cost of goods sold (with the exception
of exchange gains and losses) and takes into account the rebates and commercial income
negotiated with suppliers.
Net realisable value corresponds to the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of
business, less the estimated additional costs necessary to make the sale.
ILLUSTRATION 9.2 LCNRV Disclosures
Illustration of LCNRV
As indicated, a company values inventory at LCNRV. A company estimates net realizable
value based on the most reliable evidence of the inventories’ realizable amounts (expected
selling price, expected costs of completion, and expected costs to sell). [2] To illustrate, Jinn-
Feng Foods computes its inventory at LCNRV, as shown in Illustration 9.3 (amounts in
thousands).

Food
Cost
Net Realizable Value
Final Inventory Value
Spinach
¥ 80,000
¥120,000
¥ 80,000
Carrots
Cut beans
Peas
Mixed vegetables
¥384,000
Final Inventory Value:
Spinach
Cost (¥80,000) is selected because it is lower than net realizable value.
Carrots
Cost (¥100,000) is selected because it is lower than net realizable value.
Cut beans
Net realizable value (¥40,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
Peas
Net realizable value (¥72,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
Mixed vegetables Net realizable value (¥92,000) is selected because it is lower than cost.
ILLUSTRATION 9.3 Determining Final Inventory Value
As indicated, the final inventory value of ¥384,000 equals the sum of the LCNRV for each of
the inventory items. That is, Jinn-Feng applies the LCNRV rule to each individual type of
food.
Methods of Applying LCNRV
In the Jinn-Feng Foods illustration, we assumed that the company applied the LCNRV rule
to each individual type of food. However, companies may apply the LCNRV rule to a group of
similar or related items, or to the total of the inventory. For example, in the textile industry,
sometimes it is not possible to determine selling price for each textile individually, and
therefore, it may be necessary to perform the net realizable value assessment on all textiles
that will be used to produce clothing for a particular season.1
If a company follows a similar-or-related-items or total-inventory approach in determining
LCNRV, increases in market prices tend to offset decreases in market prices. To illustrate,
assume that Jinn-Feng Foods separates its food products into two major groups, frozen and
canned, as shown in Illustration 9.4.

LCNRV by:
Cost
LCNRV
Individual Items Major Groups Total Inventory
Frozen
Spinach
¥ 80,000 ¥120,000
¥ 80,000
Carrots
Cut beans
Total frozen
¥230,000
Canned
Peas
Mixed vegetables
Total canned
Total
¥415,000 ¥434,000
¥384,000
¥394,000
¥415,000
ILLUSTRATION 9.4 Alternative Applications of LCNRV
If Jinn-Feng applies the LCNRV rule to individual items, the amount of inventory is
¥384,000. If Jinn-Feng applies the rule to major groups, it jumps to ¥394,000. If the
company applies LCNRV to the total inventory, it totals ¥415,000. Why this difference?
When a company uses a major group or total-inventory approach, net realizable values
higher than cost offset net realizable values lower than cost. For Jinn-Feng, using the
similar-or-related-items approach partially offsets the high net realizable value for spinach.
Using the total-inventory approach totally offsets it.2
In most situations, companies price inventory on an item-by-item basis. In fact, tax rules in
some countries require that companies use an individual-item basis barring practical
difficulties. In addition, the individual-item approach gives the lowest valuation for
statement of financial position purposes. In some cases, a company prices inventory on a
total-inventory basis when it offers only one end product (comprised of many different raw
materials). If it produces several end products, a company might use a similar-or-related-
items approach instead. Whichever method a company selects, it should apply the
method consistently from one period to another.3
Recording Net Realizable Value Instead of Cost
One of two methods may be used to record the income effect of valuing inventory at net
realizable value. One method, referred to as the cost-of-goods-sold method, debits cost of
goods sold for the write-down of the inventory to net realizable value. As a result, the
company does not report a loss in the income statement because the cost of goods sold
already includes the amount of the loss (see Underlying Concepts). The second method,
referred to as the loss method, debits a loss account for the write-down of the inventory to
net realizable value. We use the following inventory data for Ricardo SpA to illustrate entries
under both methods.

Underlying Concepts
The income statement under the cost-of-goods-sold method presentation lacks
representational faithfulness. That is, the cost-of-goods-sold method does not represent
what it purports to represent. However, allowing this presentation illustrates the
concept of materiality.
Cost of goods sold (before adjustment to net realizable value) €108,000
Ending inventory (cost)
Ending inventory (at net realizable value)
Illustration 9.5 shows the entries for both the cost-of-goods-sold and loss methods,
assuming the use of a perpetual inventory system.
ILLUSTRATION 9.5 Accounting for the Reduction of Inventory to Net
Realizable Value—Perpetual Inventory System
The cost-of-goods-sold method buries the loss in the Cost of Goods Sold account. The loss
method, by identifying the loss due to the write-down, shows the loss separate from Cost of
Goods Sold in the income statement.
Illustration 9.6 contrasts the differing amounts reported in the income statement under
the two approaches, using data from the Ricardo example.
IFRS does not specify a particular account to debit for the write-down. We believe the loss
method presentation is preferable because it clearly discloses the loss resulting from a
decline in inventory net realizable values.

Cost-of-Goods-Sold Method
Sales revenue
Cost of goods sold (after adjustment to net realizable value*)
Gross profit on sales
Loss Method
Sales revenue
Cost of goods sold
Gross profit on sales
Loss due to decline of inventory to net realizable value
*Cost of goods sold (before adjustment to net realizable value)
Difference between inventory at cost and net realizable value (€82,000 −
Cost of goods sold (after adjustment to net realizable value)
ILLUSTRATION 9.6 Income Statement Presentation—Cost-of-Goods-Sold and
Loss Methods of Reducing Inventory to Net Realizable Value
Use of an Allowance
Instead of crediting the Inventory account for net realizable value adjustments, companies
generally use an allowance account, often referred to as Allowance to Reduce Inventory to
Net Realizable Value. For example, using an allowance account under the loss method,
Ricardo SpA makes the following entry to record the inventory write-down to net realizable
value.
Loss Due to Decline of Inventory to Net Realizable Value 12,000
Allowance to Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable Value
Use of the allowance account results in reporting both the cost and the net realizable value of
the inventory. Ricardo reports inventory in the statement of financial position as shown in
Illustration 9.7.
Inventory (at cost)
Less: Allowance to reduce inventory to net realizable value
Inventory at net realizable value
ILLUSTRATION 9.7 Presentation of Inventory Using an Allowance Account
The use of the allowance under the cost-of-goods-sold or loss method permits both the
income statement and the statement of financial position to reflect inventory measured at
€82,000, although the statement of financial position shows a net amount of €70,000. It
also keeps subsidiary inventory ledgers and records in correspondence with the control
account without changing prices. For homework purposes, use an allowance account to
record net realizable value adjustments, unless instructed otherwise.

Recovery of Inventory Loss
In periods following the write-down, economic conditions may change such that the net
realizable value of inventories previously written down may be greater than cost, or there
may be clear evidence of an increase in the net realizable value. In this situation, the amount
of the write-down is reversed, with the reversal limited to the amount of the original write-
down. [4]
Continuing the Ricardo example, assume that in the subsequent period, market conditions
change, such that the net realizable value increases to €74,000 (an increase of €4,000). As a
result, only €8,000 is needed in the allowance. Ricardo makes the following entry, using the
loss method.
Allowance to Reduce Inventory to Net Realizable Value 4,000
Recovery of Inventory Loss (€74,000 − €70,000)
The allowance account is then adjusted in subsequent periods, such that
inventory is reported at the LCNRV. Illustration 9.8 shows the net realizable value
evaluation for Vuko Company and the effect of net realizable value adjustments on income.
Date
Inventory
at Cost
Inventory at Net
Realizable Value
Amount Required in
Allowance Account
Adjustment of
Allowance Account
Balance
Effect on
Net
Income
Dec.
 12,000 inc. Decrease
Dec.
5,000 dec. Increase
Dec.
7,000 dec. Increase
Dec.
2,000 inc. Decrease
ILLUSTRATION 9.8 Effect on Net Income of Adjusting Inventory to Net
Realizable Value
If prices are falling, the company records an additional write-down. If prices are rising, the
company records an increase in income. We can think of the net increase as a recovery of a
previously recognized loss. Under no circumstances should the inventory be reported at a
value above original cost.
Evaluation of the LCNRV Rule
The LCNRV rule suffers from some conceptual deficiencies:
1. A company recognizes decreases in the value of the asset and the charge to expense in
the period in which the loss in utility occurs—not in the period of sale. On the other

hand, it recognizes increases in the value of the asset (in excess of original cost) only at
the point of sale. This inconsistent treatment can distort income data.
2. Application of the rule results in inconsistency because a company may value the
inventory at cost in one year and at net realizable value in the next year.
3. The LCNRV rule values the inventory in the statement of financial position
conservatively, but its effect on the income statement may or may not be conservative.
Net income for the year in which a company takes the loss is definitely lower. Net
income of the subsequent period may be higher than normal if the expected reductions
in sales price do not materialize.
Many financial statement users appreciate the LCNRV rule because they at least know that it
prevents overstatement of inventory. In addition, recognizing all losses but anticipating no
gains generally avoids overstatement of income.
Valuation Bases
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 2
Identify other inventory valuation issues.
Net Realizable Value
For the most part, companies record inventory at LCNRV.4 However, there are some
situations in which companies depart from the LCNRV rule. Such treatment may be justified
in situations when cost is difficult to determine, the items are readily marketable at quoted
market prices, and units of product are interchangeable. In this section, we discuss two
common situations in which net realizable value is the general rule for valuing inventory:
Agricultural assets (including biological assets and agricultural produce).
Commodities held by broker-traders.
Agricultural Inventory
Under IFRS, net realizable value measurement is used for inventory when the inventory is
related to agricultural activity. In general, agricultural activity results in two types of
agricultural assets: (1) biological assets or (2) agricultural produce at the point of harvest.
[6]
A biological asset (classified as a non-current asset) is a living animal or plant, such as
sheep, cows, fruit trees, or cotton plants. Agricultural produce is the harvested product of
a biological asset, such as wool from a sheep, milk from a dairy cow, picked fruit from a fruit
tree, or cotton from a cotton plant. The accounting for these assets is as follows.
Biological assets are measured on initial recognition and at the end of each reporting
period at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). Companies record a gain or
loss due to changes in the net realizable value of biological assets in income when it
arises.5

Agricultural produce (which is harvested from biological assets) is measured at fair
value less costs to sell (net realizable value) at the point of harvest. Once harvested, the
net realizable value of the agricultural produce becomes its cost, and this asset is
accounted for similar to other inventories held for sale in the normal course of
business.6
Illustration of Agricultural Accounting at Net Realizable Value
To illustrate the accounting at net realizable value for agricultural assets, assume that
Bancroft Dairy produces milk for sale to local cheese makers. Bancroft begins operations on
January 1, 2022, by purchasing 420 milking cows for €460,000. Illustration 9.9 presents
Bancroft’s information related to the milking cows.
Milking cows
Carrying value, January 1, 2022*
Change in fair value due to growth and price changes
Decrease in fair value due to harvest
Change in carrying value
Carrying value, January 31, 2022
Milk harvested during January**
*The carrying value is measured at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). The fair
value of milking cows is determined based on market prices of livestock of similar age,
breed, and genetic merit.
**Milk is initially measured at its fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value) at the
time of milking. The fair value of milk is determined based on market prices in the local
area.
ILLUSTRATION 9.9 Agricultural Assets—Bancroft Dairy
As indicated, the carrying value of the milking cows increased during the month. Part of the
change is due to changes in market prices (less costs to sell) for milking cows (see
Underlying Concepts). The change in market price may also be affected by growth—the
increase in value as the cows mature and develop increased milking capacity. At the same
time, as mature cows are milked, their milking capacity declines (fair value decrease due to
harvest).7
Underlying Concepts
IFRS uses the terms book value, carrying value, and carrying amount interchangeably.
Bancroft makes the following entry to record the change in carrying value of the milking
cows.
Biological Assets (milking cows) (€493,800 − €460,000) 33,800
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
As a result of this entry, Bancroft’s statement of financial position reports Biological Assets
(milking cows) as a non-current asset at fair value less costs to sell (net realizable value). In

addition, the unrealized gains and losses are reported as “Other income and expense” on the
income statement. In subsequent periods at each reporting date, Bancroft continues to report
Biological Assets at net realizable value and records any related unrealized gains or losses in
income. Because there is a ready market for the biological assets (milking cows), valuation at
net realizable value provides more relevant information about these assets.
In addition to recording the change in the biological assets, Bancroft makes the following
summary entry to record the milk harvested for the month of January.
Inventory (milk)
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
The milk inventory is recorded at net realizable value at the time it is harvested and
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income is recognized in income. As with the biological
assets, net realizable value is considered the most relevant for purposes of valuation at
harvest. What happens to the milk inventory that Bancroft records upon harvesting the milk
from the cows? Assuming the milk harvested in January was sold to a local cheese maker for
€38,500, Bancroft records the sale as follows.
Cash
Cost of Goods Sold 36,000
Inventory (milk)
Sales Revenue
Once harvested, the net realizable value of the harvested milk becomes its cost. The milk is
accounted for similarly to other inventories held for sale in the normal course of business.
A final note: Some animals or plants may not be considered biological assets but would be
classified and accounted for as other types of assets (not at net realizable value). For
example, a pet shop may hold an inventory of dogs, purchased from breeders, that it then
sells. Because the pet shop is not breeding the dogs, these dogs are not considered biological
assets. As a result, the dogs are accounted for as inventory held for sale (at LCNRV).
Commodity Broker-Traders
Commodity broker-traders also generally measure their inventories at fair value less costs to
sell (net realizable value), with changes in net realizable value recognized in income in the
period of the change. Broker-traders buy or sell commodities (such as harvested corn, wheat,
precious metals, and heating oil) for others or on their own account. The primary purpose for
holding these inventories is to sell the commodities in the near term and generate a profit
from fluctuations in price. Thus, net realizable value is the most relevant measure in this
industry because it indicates the amount that the broker-trader will receive from this
inventory in the future.
Assessing whether a company is acting in the role of a broker-trader requires judgment.
Companies should consider the length of time they are likely to hold the inventory and the
extent of additional services related to the commodity. If there are significant additional
services, such as distribution, storage, or repackaging, the company is likely not acting as a
broker-dealer. Thus, measurement of the commodity inventory at net realizable value is not
appropriate. For example, Columbia Coffee Wholesalers buys coffee beans and resells the
commodity in the same condition after a short period of time. Accounting for the coffee

inventory at net realizable value appears appropriate. However, if Columbia expands the
business to roast the beans and repackage them for resale to local coffee shops, the coffee
inventory should be accounted for at LCNRV, similar to other inventory held for sale.8
Relative Standalone Sales Value
A special problem arises when a company buys a group of varying units in a single lump-
sum purchase, also called a basket purchase.
To illustrate, assume that Woodland Developers purchases land for $1 million that it will
subdivide into 400 lots. These lots are of different sizes and shapes but can be roughly sorted
into three groups graded A, B, and C. As Woodland sells the lots, it apportions the purchase
cost of $1 million among the lots sold and the lots remaining on hand.
Why would Woodland not simply divide the total cost of $1 million by 400 lots, to get a cost
of $2,500 for each lot? This approach would not recognize that the lots vary in size, shape,
and attractiveness. Therefore, to accurately value each unit, the common and most logical
practice is to allocate the total among the various units on the basis of their relative
standalone sales value.
Illustration 9.10 shows the allocation of relative standalone sales value for the Woodland
Developers example.
Lots
Number of
Lots
Sales Price
per Lot
Total Sales
Price
Relative Sales
Price
Total Cost
Cost
Allocated to
Lots
Cost
per Lot
A
100/250 $1,000,000
B
60/250
C
90/250
ILLUSTRATION 9.10 Allocation of Costs, Using Relative Standalone Sales
Value
Using the amounts given in the “Cost per Lot” column, Woodland can determine the cost of
lots sold and the gross profit as shown in Illustration 9.11.
Lots Number of Lots Sold Cost per Lot Cost of Lots Sold
Sales
Gross Profit
A
B
C
ILLUSTRATION 9.11 Determination of Gross Profit, Using Relative Standalone
Sales Value
The ending inventory is therefore $320,000 ($1,000,000 − $680,000).
Woodland also can compute this inventory amount another way. The ratio of cost to selling
price for all the lots is $1 million divided by $2,500,000, or 40 percent. Accordingly, if the
total sales price of lots sold is, say $1,700,000, then the cost of the lots sold is 40 percent of

$1,700,000, or $680,000. The inventory of lots on hand is then $1 million less $680,000, or
The petroleum industry widely uses the relative standalone sales value method to value (at
cost) the many products and by-products obtained from a barrel of crude oil.
Purchase Commitments—A Special Problem
In many lines of business, a company’s survival and continued profitability depend on its
having a sufficient stock of merchandise to meet customer demand. Consequently, it is quite
common for a company to make purchase commitments, which are agreements to buy
inventory weeks, months, or even years in advance. Generally, the seller retains title to the
merchandise or materials covered in the purchase commitments. Indeed, the goods may
exist only as natural resources, such as unplanted seed (in the case of agricultural
commodities), or as work-in-process (in the case of a product).9
Usually, it is neither necessary nor proper for the buyer to make any entries to reflect
commitments for purchases of goods that the seller has not shipped. Ordinary orders, for
which the buyer and seller will determine prices at the time of shipment and which are
subject to cancellation, do not represent either an asset or a liability to the buyer.
Therefore, the buyer need not record such purchase commitments or report them in the
financial statements.
What happens, though, if a buyer enters into a formal, non-cancelable purchase contract?
Even then, the buyer recognizes no asset or liability at the date of inception because the
contract is “executory” in nature: Neither party has fulfilled its part of the contract.
However, if material, the buyer should disclose such contract details in a note to its financial
statements. Illustration 9.12 shows an example of a purchase commitment disclosure.
Note 1: Contracts for the purchase of raw materials in 2023 have been executed in the
amount of $600,000. The market price of such raw materials on December 31, 2022, is
ILLUSTRATION 9.12 Disclosure of Purchase Commitment
In the disclosure in Illustration 9.12, the contract price was less than the market price at the
statement of financial position date. If the contract price is greater than the market
price and the buyer expects that losses will occur when the purchase is made, the
buyer should recognize a liability and corresponding loss in the period during
which such declines in market prices take place (see Underlying Concepts).10
Underlying Concepts
Reporting the loss is conservative. However, reporting the decline in market price is
debatable because no asset is recorded. This area demonstrates the need for good
definitions of assets and liabilities.
To illustrate the accounting problem, assume that Apres Paper AG signed timber-cutting
contracts with Galling Land Ltd. to be executed in 2023 at a price of €10,000,000. Assume
further that the market price of the timber-cutting rights on December 31, 2022, dropped to
€7,000,000. Apres would make the following entry on December 31, 2022.

Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
Purchase Commitment Liability (€10,000,000 − €7,000,000)
Apres reports this unrealized holding loss in the income statement under “Other income and
expense.” And because the contract is to be executed within the next fiscal year, Apres
reports the Purchase Commitment Liability (often referred to as a provision) in the current
liabilities section on the statement of financial position. When Apres cuts the timber at a cost
of €10 million, it would make the following entry.
Purchases (Inventory)
Purchase Commitment Liability 3,000,000
Cash
The result of the purchase commitment was that Apres paid €10 million for a contract worth
only €7 million. It recorded the loss in the previous period—when the price actually declined.
If Apres can partially or fully recover the contract price before it cuts the timber, it reduces
the Purchase Commitment Liability. In that case, it then reports in the period of the price
increase a resulting gain for the amount of the partial or full recovery. For example, assume
that Galling Land Ltd. permits Apres to reduce its commitment from €10,000,000 to
€9,000,000. The entry to record this transaction is as follows.
Purchase Commitment Liability (€10,000,000 − €9,000,000) 1,000,000
Unrealized Holding Gain or Loss—Income
If the market price at the time Apres cuts the timber is more than €2,000,000 below the
contract price, Apres will have to recognize an additional loss in the period of cutting and
record the purchase at the LCNRV.
Are purchasers at the mercy of market price declines? Not totally. Purchasers can protect
themselves against the possibility of market price declines of goods under contract by
hedging. Through hedging, the purchaser in the purchase commitment simultaneously
enters into a contract in which it agrees to sell in the future the same quantity of the same
(or similar) goods at a fixed price. Thus, the company holds a buy position in a purchase
commitment and a sell position in a futures contract in the same commodity. The purpose of
the hedge is to offset the price risk of the buy and sell positions. The company will be better
off under one contract by approximately (maybe exactly) the same amount by which it is
worse off under the other contract.
For example, Apres could have hedged its purchase commitment contract with a futures
contract for timber rights of the same amount. In that case, its loss of €3,000,000 on the
purchase commitment could have been offset by a €3,000,000 gain on the futures contract.11
Although it sounds relatively easy, accounting for purchase commitments is controversial.
Some argue that companies should report purchase commitments as assets and liabilities at
the time they sign the contract. Others believe that delaying the recognition to the delivery
date is more appropriate. Although the discussion in the Conceptual Framework does not
exclude the possibility of recording assets and liabilities for purchase commitments, it
contains no definitive conclusion about whether companies should record them. [9]
The Gross Profit Method of Estimating Inventory

LEARNING OBJECTIVE 3
Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
Companies take a physical inventory to verify the accuracy of the perpetual inventory records
or, if no records exist, to arrive at an inventory amount. Sometimes, however, taking a
physical inventory is impractical. In such cases, companies use substitute measures to
approximate inventory on hand.
One substitute method of verifying or determining the inventory amount is the gross profit
method (also called the gross margin method). Auditors widely use this method in
situations where they need only an estimate of the company’s inventory (e.g., interim
reports). Companies also use this method when fire or other catastrophe destroys either
inventory or inventory records. The gross profit method relies on three assumptions:
1. The beginning inventory plus purchases equal total goods to be accounted for.
2. Goods not sold must be on hand.
3. The sales, reduced to cost, deducted from the sum of the opening inventory plus
purchases, equal ending inventory.
To illustrate, assume that Cetus SE has a beginning inventory of €60,000 and purchases of
€200,000, both at cost. Sales at selling price amount to €280,000. The gross profit on selling
price is 30 percent. Cetus applies the gross profit method as shown in Illustration 9.13.
Beginning inventory (at cost)
Purchases (at cost)
Goods available (at cost)
Sales (at selling price)
Less: Gross profit (.30 x €280,000)
Sales (at cost)
Approximate inventory (at cost)
ILLUSTRATION 9.13 Application of Gross Profit Method
The current period’s records contain all the information Cetus needs to compute inventory at
cost, except for the gross profit percentage. Cetus determines the gross profit percentage by
reviewing company policies or prior period records. In some cases, companies must adjust
this percentage if they consider prior periods unrepresentative of the current period.12
Computation of Gross Profit Percentage
In most situations, the gross profit percentage is stated as a percentage of selling price.
The previous illustration, for example, used a 30 percent gross profit on sales. Gross profit
on selling price is the common method for quoting the profit for several reasons. (1) Most
companies state goods on a retail basis, not a cost basis. (2) A profit quoted on selling price is
lower than one based on cost. This lower rate gives a favorable impression to the consumer.
(3) The gross profit based on selling price can never exceed 100 percent.13

In Illustration 9.13, the gross profit was a given. But how did Cetus derive that figure? To see
how to compute a gross profit percentage, assume that an article costs €15 and sells for €20,
a gross profit of €5. As shown in the computations in Illustration 9.14, this markup is ¼
or 25 percent of retail, and ⅓ or 33⅓ percent of cost.
=
= 25% at retail
=
= 33⅓% on cost
ILLUSTRATION 9.14 Computation of Gross Profit Percentage
Although companies normally compute the gross profit on the basis of selling price, you
should understand the basic relationship between markup on cost and markup on selling
price. For example, assume that a company marks up a given item by 25 percent on cost.
What, then, is the gross profit on selling price? To find the answer, assume that the item
sells for €1. In this case, the following formula applies.
Cost + Gross profit = Selling price
C + .25C = SP
(1 + .25)C = SP
1.25C = €1.00
C = €0.80
The gross profit equals €0.20 (€1.00 − €0.80). The rate of gross profit on selling price is
therefore 20 percent (€0.20/€1.00).
Conversely, assume that the gross profit on selling price is 20 percent. What is the markup
on cost? To find the answer, assume that the item sells for €1. Again, the same formula
holds:
Cost + Gross profit = Selling price
C + .20SP = SP
C = (1 − .20)SP
C = .80SP
C = .80(€1.00)
C = €0.80
As in the previous example, the markup equals €0.20 (€1.00 − €0.80). The markup on cost
is 25 percent (€0.20 ÷ €0.80).
Illustration 9.15 presents formulas that retailers use to express these relationships:
Markup
Retail
€5
Markup
Cost
€5

1. Gross Profit on Selling Price =
2. Percentage Markup on Cost =
ILLUSTRATION 9.15 Formulas Relating to Gross Profit
To understand how to use these formulas, consider their application in the calculations
shown in Illustration 9.16.
ILLUSTRATION 9.16 Application of Gross Profit Formulas
Because selling price exceeds cost, and with the gross profit amount the same for both,
gross profit on selling price will always be less than the related percentage based
on cost. Note that companies do not multiply sales by a cost-based markup percentage.
Instead, they must convert the gross profit percentage to a percentage based on selling price.
Evaluation of Gross Profit Method
What are the major disadvantages of the gross profit method? One disadvantage is that it
provides an estimate. As a result, companies must take a physical inventory to verify the
inventory. Second, the gross profit method uses past percentages in determining the
markup. Although the past often provides answers to the future, a current rate is more
appropriate. Note that whenever significant fluctuations occur, companies should adjust the
percentage as appropriate. Third, companies must be careful in applying a blanket gross
profit rate. Frequently, a store or department handles merchandise with widely varying
rates of gross profit. In these situations, the company may need to apply the gross profit
method by subsections, lines of merchandise, or a similar basis that classifies merchandise
according to their respective rates of gross profit. The gross profit method is normally
unacceptable for financial reporting purposes because it provides only an
estimate. IFRS requires a physical inventory as additional verification of the inventory
indicated in the records. Note that the gross profit method will follow closely the inventory
method used (FIFO or average-cost) because it relies on historical records.
Percentage Markup on Cost
100% + Percentage Markup on Cost
Gross Profit on Selling Price
100% − Percentage Markup on Cost

What Do the Numbers Mean?
I’ll Trade You
Now that we know how to record a decline in value below cost, you might wonder what
managers do with problem inventory that has been written down. Unfortunately, the
solution for many companies is either to (a) negotiate with liquidators to get the best
price for the inventory, which is typically only 10 to 40 percent of book value, or (b) even
worse, ignore it. As one manager remarked: “We’ll figure it out later. There are more
pressing matters to attend to right now.” However, without a good plan to deal with
problem inventory, other challenges arise, such as problem inventory taking up space
that could be used for newer, more profitable products; storage costs; and waste
(inventory that perishes or whose date has expired often simply gets thrown out).
Reducing wasted inventory is critical for cost control and profitability. So, what to do?
An increasingly popular approach to managing excess problematic inventory is corporate
barter—the exchange of goods and services for problem inventory on a non-cash basis
through the use of commercial trade credit. This is how it works. The company with the
problem inventory seeks a trading partner that could provide something of value in
exchange for the problem inventory. Media services, including TV and radio commercial
air time and print advertising space, have long been the barter instrument of choice.
The company with the problem inventory receives advertising and other services—
services that are especially valuable for companies with no or limited media budgets.
Logistics barter is also common, which includes services such as ocean or air freight,
less than truckload (LTL), full truck, intermodal, and drayage. All companies require
some form of logistics to do business, and logistics barter can be typically used by
companies whose annual sales revenue is as little as $50 million.
A liquidator may still be involved to sell the problem inventory, but the barter partner
usually receives three to four times the cash liquidation value. This is because the
liquidator sells the inventory under restrictions, such as limiting redistribution of the
assets to certain geographic areas or to certain accounts such as non-competitive
accounts or to inappropriate selling environments, such as discount or secondhand
outlets. The company that unloads the problem inventory now has a trade credit that
can be used to purchase raw materials, capital equipment, or professional services.
While a barter transaction cannot help a company avoid the accounting consequences of
an inventory impairment, it represents an innovative way to make the best of a bad
situation.
Source: Modified from Nicholas Isasi, “Achieving a Higher Value for Problematic Inventory via Corporate Barter,”
Accounting Today (October 21, 2015).
Retail Inventory Method
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 4
Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.

Accounting for inventory in a retail operation presents several challenges. Retailers with
certain types of inventory may use the specific identification method to value their
inventories. Such an approach makes sense when a retailer holds significant individual
inventory units, such as automobiles, pianos, or fur coats. However, imagine attempting to
use such an approach at Carrefour (FRA), Debenhams (GBR), or Bloomingdale’s (USA)
—high-volume retailers and supermarkets that have many different types of merchandise. It
would be extremely difficult to determine the cost of each sale, to enter cost codes on the
tickets, to change the codes to reflect declines in value of the merchandise, to allocate costs
such as transportation, and so on.
An alternative is to compile the inventories at retail prices. For most retailers, an observable
pattern between cost and selling price exists. The retailer can then use a formula to convert
retail prices to cost. This method is called the retail inventory method. It requires that
the retailer keep a record of (1) the total cost and retail value of goods purchased,
(2) the total cost and retail value of the goods available for sale, and (3) the sales
for the period. Use of the retail inventory method is very common. For example,
Carrefour supermarkets uses the retail inventory method, as do Walmart (USA) and
Debenhams (GBR).
Here is how it works at a company like Debenhams. Beginning with the retail value of the
goods available for sale, Debenhams deducts the sales for the period. This calculation
determines an estimated inventory (goods on hand) at retail. It next computes the cost-to-
retail ratio for all goods. The formula for this computation is to divide the total goods
available for sale at cost by the total goods available at retail price. Finally, to obtain ending
inventory at cost, Debenhams applies the cost-to-retail ratio to the ending inventory valued
at retail. Illustration 9.17 shows the retail inventory method calculations for Debenhams
using assumed data.
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
Purchases
Goods available for sale
Deduct: Sales
Ending inventory, at retail
Ratio of cost to retail (£77,000 ÷ £110,000) =
Ending inventory at cost (.70 x £25,000) = £17,500
ILLUSTRATION 9.17 Retail Inventory Method Calculations
There are different versions of the retail inventory method. These include the conventional
method (based on LCNRV) and the cost method. Regardless of which version a company
uses, tax authorities, various retail associations, and the accounting profession all sanction
use of the retail inventory method. One of its advantages is that a company like Debenhams
can approximate the inventory balance without a physical count. However, to avoid a
potential overstatement of the inventory, Debenhams makes periodic inventory counts. Such
counts are especially important in retail operations where loss due to shoplifting or breakage
is common.

The retail inventory method is particularly useful for any type of interim report because such
reports usually need a fairly quick and reliable measure of the inventory. Also, insurance
adjusters often use this method to estimate losses from fire, flood, or other type of casualty.
This method also acts as a control device because a company will have to explain any
discrepancies between the results of the retail method and a physical count at the end of the
year. Finally, the retail method expedites the physical inventory count at year-end. The
crew taking the physical inventory need record only the retail price of each item. The crew
does not need to look up each item’s invoice cost, thereby saving time and expense.
Retail-Method Concepts
The amounts shown in the “Retail” column of Illustration 9.17 represent the original retail
prices, assuming no price changes. In practice, though, retailers frequently mark up or mark
down the prices they charge buyers.
For retailers, the term markup means an additional markup of the original retail price. (In
another context, such as in the previous discussion of gross profit, we often think of markup
on the basis of cost.) Markup cancellations are decreases in prices of merchandise that
the retailer had marked up above the original retail price.
In a competitive market, retailers often need to use markdowns, which are decreases in the
original sales prices. Such cuts in sales prices may be necessary due to a decrease in the
general level of prices, special sales, soiled or damaged goods, overstocking, and market
competition. Markdowns are common in retailing these days. Markdown cancellations
occur when the markdowns are later offset by increases in the prices of goods that the
retailer had marked down—such as after a one-day sale. Neither a markup cancellation nor a
markdown cancellation can exceed the original markup or markdown.
To illustrate these concepts, assume that Designer Clothing Store recently purchased 100
dress shirts from Marroway Group. The cost for these shirts was €1,500, or €15 a shirt.
Designer Clothing established the selling price on these shirts at €30 a shirt. The shirts were
selling quickly, so the manager added a markup of €5 per shirt. This markup made the price
too high for customers, and sales slowed. The manager then reduced the price to €32. At this
point, we would say that the shirts at Designer Clothing have had a markup of €5 and a
markup cancellation of €3.
A month later, the manager marked down the remaining shirts to a sales price of €23. At this
point, an additional markup cancellation of €2 has taken place, and a €7 markdown has
occurred. If the manager later increases the price of the shirts to €24, a markdown
cancellation of €1 would occur.
Retail Inventory Method with Markups and Markdowns—Conventional
Method
Retailers use markup and markdown concepts in developing the proper inventory valuation
at the end of the accounting period. To obtain the appropriate inventory figures, companies
must give proper treatment to markups, markup cancellations, markdowns, and markdown
cancellations.
To illustrate the different possibilities, consider the data for In-Fusion SA shown in
Illustration 9.18. In-Fusion can calculate its ending inventory at cost under two
assumptions, A and B. (We’ll explain the reasons for the two later.)

Assumption A: Computes a cost ratio after markups (and markup cancellations) but
before markdowns.
Assumption B: Computes a cost ratio after both markups and markdowns (and
cancellations).
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
Purchases (net)
Markups
Markup cancellations
Markdowns
Markdown cancellations
Sales (net)
In-Fusion SA
Cost
Retail
Beginning inventory
Purchases (net)
Merchandise available for sale
Add: Markups
Less: Markup cancellations
Net markups
 
(A)
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 53.9%
Deduct:
Markdowns
Less: Markdown cancellations
Net markdowns
(B)
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 54.7%
Deduct: Sales (net)
Ending inventory, at retail
ILLUSTRATION 9.18 Retail Inventory Method with Markups and Markdowns
The computations for In-Fusion are:
Ending Inventory at Retail × Cost Ratio = Value of Ending Inventory
Assumption A: €12,500 × .539 = €6,737.50

Assumption B: €12,500 × .547 = €6,837.50
The question becomes: Which assumption and which percentage should In-Fusion use to
compute the ending inventory valuation? The answer depends on which retail inventory
method In-Fusion chooses.
One approach uses only Assumption A (a cost ratio using markups but not
markdowns). It approximates the lower-of-average-cost-or-net realizable value.
We will refer to this approach as the conventional retail inventory method or the
LCNRV.
To understand why this method considers only the markups, not the markdowns, in the cost
percentage, you must understand how a retail business operates. A markup normally
indicates an increase in the sales value of the item. On the other hand, a markdown means a
decline in the utility of that item. Therefore, to approximate the LCNRV, we would consider
markdowns a current loss and so would not include them in calculating the cost-to-retail
ratio. Omitting the markdowns would make the cost-to-retail ratio lower, which leads to an
approximate LCNRV.
An example will make the distinction between the two methods clear. Assume In-Fusion
purchased two items for €5 apiece; the original sales price was €10 each. One item was
subsequently marked down to €2. Assuming no sales for the period, if markdowns are
considered in the cost-to-retail ratio (Assumption B—the cost method), we compute the
ending inventory as shown in Illustration 9.19.
Markdowns Included in Cost-to-Retail Ratio
Cost
Retail
Purchases
Deduct: Markdowns (€10 − €2)
Ending inventory, at retail
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 83.3%
Ending inventory at cost (€12 × .833) = €10
ILLUSTRATION 9.19 Retail Inventory Method Including Markdowns—Cost
Method
This approach (the cost method) reflects an average cost of the two items of the
commodity without considering the loss on the one item. It values ending inventory at €10.
If markdowns are not considered in the cost-to-retail ratio (Assumption A—the
conventional retail method), we compute the ending inventory as shown in Illustration

Markdowns Not Included in Cost-to-Retail Ratio
Cost
Retail
Purchases
Cost-to-retail ratio =
= 50%
Deduct: Markdowns
Ending inventory, at retail
Ending inventory at cost (€12 × .50) = €6
ILLUSTRATION 9.20 Retail Inventory Method Excluding Markdowns—
Conventional Method (LCNRV)
Under this approach (the conventional retail method, in which markdowns are not
considered), ending inventory would be €6. The inventory valuation of €6 reflects two
inventory items, one inventoried at €5 and the other at €1. It reflects the fact that In-Fusion
reduced the sales price from €10 to €2, and reduced the cost from €5 to €1.14
To approximate the LCNRV, In-Fusion must establish the cost-to-retail ratio. It does this
by dividing the cost of goods available for sale by the sum of the original retail price of these
goods plus the net markups. This calculation excludes markdowns and markdown
cancellations. Illustration 9.21 shows the basic format for the retail inventory method
using the LCNRV approach along with the In-Fusion information.
ILLUSTRATION 9.21 Comprehensive Conventional Retail Inventory Method
Format

Because an averaging effect occurs, an exact LCNRV inventory valuation is ordinarily not
obtained, but an adequate approximation can be achieved. In contrast, adding net markups
and deducting net markdowns yield approximate cost.
Special Items Relating to Retail Method
The retail inventory method becomes more complicated when we consider such items as
freight-in, purchase returns and allowances, and purchase discounts. In the retail method,
we treat such items as follows.
Freight costs are part of the purchase cost.
Purchase returns are ordinarily considered as a reduction of the price at both cost and
retail.
Purchase discounts and allowances usually are considered as a reduction of the
cost of purchases.
In short, the treatment for the items affecting the cost column of the retail inventory
approach follows the computation for cost of goods available for sale.15
Note also that sales returns and allowances are considered as proper adjustments to
gross sales. However, when sales are recorded gross, companies do not recognize sales
discounts. To adjust for the sales discount account in such a situation would provide an
ending inventory figure at retail that would be overvalued.
In addition, a number of special items require careful analysis:
Transfers-in from another department are reported in the same way as purchases from
an outside enterprise.
Normal shortages (breakage, damage, theft, shrinkage) should reduce the retail
column because these goods are no longer available for sale. Such costs are reflected in
the selling price because a certain amount of shortage is considered normal in a retail
enterprise. As a result, companies do not consider this amount in computing the cost-to-
retail percentage. Rather, to arrive at ending inventory at retail, they show normal
shortages as a deduction similar to sales.
Abnormal shortages, on the other hand, are deducted from both the cost and retail
columns and reported as a special inventory amount or as a loss. To do otherwise
distorts the cost-to-retail ratio and overstates ending inventory.
Employee discounts (given to employees to encourage loyalty and better
performance) are deducted from the retail column in the same way as sales. These
discounts should not be considered in the cost-to-retail percentage because they do not
reflect an overall change in the selling price.16
Illustration 9.22 shows some of these concepts. The company, Extreme Sport Apparel,
determines its inventory using the conventional retail inventory method.

ILLUSTRATION 9.22 Conventional Retail Inventory Method—Special Items
Included
Evaluation of Retail Inventory Method
Companies such as Carrefour (FRA), Marks and Spencer (GBR), and your local
department store use the retail inventory method of computing inventory for the following
reasons: (1) to permit the computation of net income without a physical count of inventory,
(2) as a control measure in determining inventory shortages, (3) in regulating quantities of
merchandise on hand, and (4) for insurance information.
One characteristic of the retail inventory method is that it has an averaging effect on
varying rates of gross profit. This can be problematic when companies apply the method
to an entire business, where rates of gross profit vary among departments. There is no
allowance for possible distortion of results because of such differences. Companies refine the
retail method under such conditions by computing inventory separately by departments, or
by classes of merchandise with similar gross profits. In addition, the reliability of this
method assumes that the distribution of items in inventory is similar to the “mix” in the total
goods available for sale.
Presentation and Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 5
Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
Presentation of Inventories

Accounting standards require financial statement disclosure of the following items related to
inventories:
1. The accounting policies adopted in measuring inventories, including the cost formula
used (weighted-average, FIFO).
2. The total carrying amount of inventories and the carrying amount in classifications
(common classifications of inventories are merchandise, production supplies, raw
materials, work-in-process, and finished goods).
3. The carrying amount of inventories carried at fair value less costs to sell.
4. The amount of inventories recognized as an expense during the period (cost of goods
sold).
5. The amount of any write-down of inventories recognized as an expense in the period and
the amount of any reversal of write-downs recognized as a reduction of expense in the
period.
6. The circumstances or events that led to the reversal of a write-down of inventories.
7. The carrying amount of inventories pledged as security for liabilities, if any.
This information can be disclosed in the statement of financial position or in a separate
schedule in the notes. The relative mix of raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods
helps in assessing liquidity and in computing the stage of inventory completion. Significant
or unusual financing arrangements relating to inventories may require note disclosure.
Examples include transactions with related parties, product financing arrangements, firm
purchase commitments, and pledging of inventories as collateral. [10] For example,
Illustration 9.23 shows the disclosures from the annual report of Lectra SA (FRA).

ILLUSTRATION 9.23 Disclosure of Inventory Methods
If Lectra changes the method of pricing any of its inventory elements, it must report a
change in accounting principle. For example, if Lectra changes its method of accounting for
its finished goods from weighted-average to FIFO, it should separately report this change,
along with the effect on income, in the current and prior periods (as discussed in Chapter
22). Changes in accounting principle require an explanatory paragraph in the auditor’s report
describing the change in method.
As another example of inventory disclosure practices, Pernod Ricard (FRA) reported its
inventories in its annual report, as shown in Illustration 9.24 (note the “trade practice”
followed in classifying some long-cycle inventories among the current assets).

Pernod Ricard
Current assets
Inventories (Note 4.4)
Note 4.4 Inventories
Inventories are measured at the lowest of either cost (acquisition cost and cost of
production, including indirect production overheads) or net realizable value. Net realizable
value is the selling price less the estimated costs of completion and sale of the inventories.
Most inventories are valued using the weighted average cost method. The cost of long-cycle
inventories is calculated using a single method which includes distilling and ageing
maturing costs. These inventories are classified in current assets, although a substantial
part remains in inventory for more than one year before being sold in order to undergo the
ageing process used for certain Wines and Spirits.
The breakdown of inventories and work-in-progress at the balance sheet date is as follows:
Movements in the year
In euro
millions
Beginning
of year
Change
in gross
value
Change in
impairment
Foreign
currency
gains and
losses
Other
movements
End of
year
Raw materials
—
Work-in-
progress
—
Goods in
inventory
—
Finished
products
—
GROSS VALUE
—
Raw materials
—
Work-in-
progress
—
Goods in
inventory
—
Finished
products
—
IMPAIRMENT
—
NET
INVENTORIES
Other movements are mostly due to foreign currency gains and losses. At year-end,
maturing inventories intended mainly for use in whisky and cognac production accounted
for 84% of work-in-progress. Pernod Ricard is not significantly dependent on its suppliers.

ILLUSTRATION 9.24 Disclosure of Trade Practice in Valuing Inventories
As indicated in the prior illustration, companies also disclose inventory revaluations and
valuation allowances to arrive at inventory recorded at net realizable value. Thus, for Pernod
Ricard, its inventories at cost (or net realizable value) at year-end are €5,305 million.
Analysis of Inventories
The amount of inventory that a company carries can have significant economic
consequences. As a result, companies must manage inventories. But, inventory management
is a double-edged sword. It requires constant attention. On the one hand, management wants
to stock a great variety and quantity of items. Doing so will provide customers with the
greatest selection. However, such an inventory policy may incur excessive carrying costs
(e.g., investment, storage, insurance, taxes, obsolescence, and damage). On the other hand,
low inventory levels lead to stockouts, lost sales, and disgruntled customers.
Using financial ratios helps companies to chart a middle course between these two dangers.
Common ratios used in the management and evaluation of inventory levels are inventory
turnover and a related measure, average days to sell the inventory.
Inventory Turnover
The inventory turnover measures the number of times on average a company sells the
inventory during the period. It measures the liquidity of the inventory. To compute inventory
turnover, divide the cost of goods sold by the average inventory on hand during the period.
Barring seasonal factors, analysts compute average inventory from beginning and ending
inventory balances. For example, in its 2019 annual report, Tate & Lyle plc (GBR) reported
a beginning inventory of £419 million, an ending inventory of £434 million, and cost of goods
sold of £1,621 million for the year. Illustration 9.25 shows the inventory turnover formula
and Tate & Lyle’s 2019 ratio computation.
Inventory Turnover =
=
= 3.80 times
ILLUSTRATION 9.25 Inventory Turnover
Average Days to Sell Inventory
A variant of the inventory turnover ratio is the average days to sell inventory. This
measure represents the average number of days’ sales for which a company has inventory on
hand. For example, the inventory turnover for Tate & Lyle of 3.80 times divided into 365 is
approximately 96 days.
There are typical levels of inventory in every industry. However, companies that keep their
inventory at lower levels with higher turnovers than those of their competitors, while still
satisfying customer needs, are generally the most successful.
Review and Practice
Cost of Goods Sold
Average Inventory
(£419 + £434) ÷ 2

Key Terms Review
agricultural produce
average days to sell inventory
biological asset
conventional retail inventory method
cost-of-goods-sold method
cost-to-retail ratio
gross profit method
gross profit percentage
hedging
inventory turnover
loss method
lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV)
lump-sum (basket) purchase
markdown
markdown cancellations
markup
markup cancellations
net realizable value (NRV)
onerous (contract) (n)
purchase commitments
relative standalone sales value
retail inventory method
Learning Objectives Review
1 Describe and apply the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value rule.
If inventory declines in value below its original cost, for whatever reason, a company should
write down the inventory to reflect this loss. The general rule is to abandon the historical
cost principle when the future utility (revenue-producing ability) of the asset drops below its
original cost.
2 Identify other inventory valuation issues.
Companies value inventory at net realizable value when cost is difficult to determine, the
items are readily marketable at quoted market prices, and units of product are
interchangeable. Three common situations in which net realizable value is the general rule
for valuing inventory are (1) agricultural inventory (including biological assets and

agricultural produce), (2) minerals and mineral products, and (3) commodities held by
broker-traders.
When a company purchases a group of varying units at a single lump-sum price—a so-called
basket purchase—the company may allocate the total purchase price to the individual items
on the basis of relative standalone sales value.
Accounting for purchase commitments is controversial. Some argue that companies
should report purchase commitment contracts as assets and liabilities at the time the
contract is signed. Others believe that recognition at the delivery date is most appropriate. If
a company has a firm purchase commitment and the price falls below the contract price, a
loss should be recognized. IFRS refers to this situation as an onerous contract.
3 Determine ending inventory by applying the gross profit method.
Companies follow these steps to determine ending inventory by the gross profit method. (1)
Compute the gross profit percentage on selling price. (2) Compute gross profit by multiplying
net sales by the gross profit percentage. (3) Compute cost of goods sold by subtracting gross
profit from net sales. (4) Compute ending inventory by subtracting cost of goods sold from
total goods available for sale.
4 Determine ending inventory by applying the retail inventory method.
Companies follow these steps to determine ending inventory by the retail method. (1) To
estimate inventory at retail, deduct the sales for the period from the retail value of the goods
available for sale. (2) To find the cost-to-retail ratio for all goods passing through a
department or firm, divide the total goods available for sale at cost by the total goods
available at retail. (3) Convert the inventory valued at retail to approximate cost by applying
the cost-to-retail ratio.
5 Explain how to report and analyze inventory.
IFRS inventory disclosure requirements are shown with the examples in Illustrations 9.23
and 9.24. Accounting standards also require the consistent application of costing methods
from one period to another. Common ratios used in the management and evaluation of
inventory levels are inventory turnover and average days to sell the inventory.
Enhanced Review and Practice
Go online for multiple-choice questions with solutions, review exercises with solutions,
and a full glossary of all key terms.
Practice Problem
Norwood Company makes miniature circuit boards that are components of wireless
phones and personal organizers. The company has experienced strong growth, and you are
especially interested in how well Norwood is managing its inventory balances. You have
collected the following information for the current year.

Inventory at the beginning of year
Inventory at the end of year, before any adjustments
Total cost of goods sold, before any adjustments
The company values inventory at lower-of-cost (using FIFO cost flow assumption)-or-net
realizable value and uses the cost-of-goods-sold method.
Instructions
a. Compute Norwood’s inventory turnover before any adjustment.
b. Recompute the inventory turnover after adjusting Norwood’s inventory information
for the following items.
1. During the year, Norwood recorded sales and costs of goods sold on $22,000 of
units shipped to various wholesalers on consignment. At year-end, none of these
units have been sold by wholesalers.
2. Shipping contracts changed 2 months ago from f.o.b. shipping point to f.o.b.
destination point. At the end of the year, $25,000 of products are en route to
China and will not arrive until after financial statements are released. Current
inventory balances do not reflect this change in policy.
3. At the end of the year, Norwood determined that a certain section of inventory
with an historical cost of $112,000 has a net realizable value of $100,800. There is
no need to make a lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value adjustment to other
inventory.
Solution
a. 
= 11.6 times
b. Adjustments to ending inventory
Item
Adjustment
to Ending
Inventory
Explanation
1. Consigned
goods
Norwood should count the goods it has consigned in other
stores.
2. Goods in
transit
Goods officially change hands at the point of destination.
Norwood should still show these goods in inventory (not
cost of goods sold), until they reach the destination.
3. Lower-of-
cost-or-net
realizable
value
($112,000 − $100,800). The correct valuation is $100,800
since the net realizable value of $100,800 is less than the
original cost.
Adjusted inventory turnover =
($1,026,000 + $1,007,000) ÷ 2
$11,740,200a
($1,026,000 + $1,042,800)b ÷ 2

aCost of goods sold: $11,776,000 − $22,000 − $25,000 + $11,200 = $11,740,200
bEnding inventory: $1,007,000 + $22,000 + $25,000 − $11,200 = $1,042,800
Exercises, Problems, Problem Solution Walkthrough Videos, Data Analytics Activities,
and many more assessment tools and resources are available for practice in Wiley’s
online courseware.
Questions
1. Where there is evidence that the utility of inventory goods, as part of their disposal in the
ordinary course of business, will be less than cost, what is the proper accounting treatment?
2. Why are inventories valued at the lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (LCNRV)? What
are the arguments against the use of the LCNRV method of valuing inventories?
3. What approaches may be employed in applying the LCNRV procedure? Which approach is
normally used and why?
4. In some instances, accounting principles require a departure from valuing inventories at
cost alone. Determine the proper unit inventory price in the following cases.
Cases
Cost
Sales value
Estimated cost to complete
Estimated cost to sell
5. What method(s) might be used in the accounts to record a loss due to a price decline in
the inventories? Discuss.
6. What exceptions might call for inventory valuation at net realizable value?
7. Briefly describe the valuation of (a) biological assets and (b) agricultural produce.
8. Under what circumstances is relative standalone sales value an appropriate basis for
determining the price assigned to inventory?
9. At December 31, 2022, Ashley plc has outstanding purchase commitments for purchase of
150,000 gallons, at £6.20 per gallon, of a raw material to be used in its manufacturing
process. The company prices its raw material inventory at cost or net realizable value,
whichever is lower. Assuming that the market price as of December 31, 2022, is £5.90, how
would you treat this situation in the accounts?
10. What are the major uses of the gross profit method?
11. Distinguish between gross profit as a percentage of cost and gross profit as a percentage
of sales price. Convert the following gross profit percentages based on cost to gross profit
percentages based on sales price: 25% and 331⁄3%. Convert the following gross profit
percentages based on sales price to gross profit percentages based on cost: 331⁄3% and 60%.

12. With annual net sales of $5 million, Adriana Co. maintains a markup of 25% based on
cost. Adriana’s expenses average 15% of net sales. What is Adriana’s gross profit and net
profit in dollars?
13. A fire destroys all of the merchandise of Assante Company on February 10, 2022. The
following is information compiled up to the date of the fire.
Inventory, January 1, 2022
Sales to February 10, 2022
Purchases to February 10, 2022
Freight-in to February 10, 2022
Rate of gross profit on selling price
What is the approximate inventory on February 10, 2022?
14. What conditions must exist for the retail inventory method to provide valid results?
15. The conventional retail inventory method yields results that are essentially the same as
those yielded by the LCNRV method. Explain. Prepare an illustration of how the retail
inventory method reduces inventory to net realizable value.
a. Determine the ending inventory under the conventional retail method for the furniture
department of Mayron Department Stores from the following data (amounts in
thousands). (Round to nearest percent.)
Cost
Retail
Inventory, Jan. 1 ¥ 149,000 ¥ 283,500
Purchases
Freight-in
Markups, net
Markdowns, net
Sales
b. If the results of a physical inventory indicated an inventory at retail of ¥295,000, what
inferences would you draw?
17. Tesco (GBR) reported inventory in its statement of financial position as follows:
Inventories £2,430,000,000
What additional disclosures might be necessary to present the inventory fairly?
18. Of what significance is inventory turnover to a retail store?
Brief Exercises
LEARNING OBJECTIVE 6
Compare the accounting for inventories under IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
In most cases, IFRS and U.S. GAAP related to inventory are the same. The major differences
are that IFRS prohibits the use of the LIFO cost flow assumption and records market in the
LCNRV differently.
Relevant Facts
Following are the key similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS related to
inventories.
Similarities
U.S. GAAP and IFRS account for inventory acquisitions at historical cost and evaluate
inventory for lower-of-cost-or-net realizable value (market) subsequent to acquisition.
Who owns the goods—goods in transit, consigned goods, special sales agreements—as
well as the costs to include in inventory are essentially accounted for the same under
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
Differences
U.S. GAAP provides more detailed guidelines in inventory accounting. The requirements
for accounting for and reporting inventories are more principles-based under IFRS.
A major difference between U.S. GAAP and IFRS relates to the LIFO cost flow
assumption. U.S. GAAP permits the use of LIFO for inventory valuation. IFRS prohibits
its use. FIFO and average-cost are the only two acceptable cost flow assumptions
permitted under IFRS. Both sets of standards permit specific identification where
appropriate.
In the lower-of-cost-or-market test for inventory valuation, U.S. GAAP defines market as
replacement cost subject to the constraints of net realizable value (the ceiling) and net
realizable value less a normal markup (the floor) for inventories accounted for under
LIFO or retail methods. IFRS defines market as net realizable value and does not use a
ceiling or a floor to determine market.
Under U.S. GAAP, if inventory is written down under the lower-of-cost-or-market
valuation, the new basis is now considered its cost. As a result, the inventory may not be
written up back to its original cost in a subsequent period. Under IFRS, the write-down

may be reversed in a subsequent period up to the amount of the previous write-down.
Both the write-down and any subsequent reversal should be reported on the income
statement.
IFRS requires both biological assets and agricultural produce at the point of harvest to
be reported at net realizable value. U.S. GAAP does not require companies to account for
all biological assets in the same way. Furthermore, these assets generally are not
reported at net realizable value. Disclosure requirements also differ between the two
sets of standards.
About the Numbers
Illustration GAAP 9.1 presents a disclosure under U.S. GAAP related to inventories for
Altria Group, Inc. (USA), which reflects application of U.S. GAAP to its inventories.
On the Horizon
One convergence issue that will be difficult to resolve relates to the use of the LIFO cost flow
assumption. As indicated, IFRS specifically prohibits its use. Conversely, the LIFO cost flow
assumption is widely used in the United States because of its favorable tax advantages. In
addition, many argue that LIFO from a financial reporting point of view provides a better
matching of current costs against revenue and therefore enables companies to compute a
more realistic income.
Altria Group, Inc. (USA)
Current assets (in millions of $)
Inventories (Note 2):
Leaf tobacco
Other raw materials
Work-in-process
Finished product
Total
Note 2: Inventories
The last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method is used to determine the cost of substantially all
tobacco inventories. The cost of the remaining inventories is determined using the first-in,
first-out (“FIFO”) and average cost methods. Inventories that are measured using the LIFO
method are stated at the lower of cost or market. Inventories that are measured using the
FIFO and average cost methods are stated at the lower of cost and net realizable value. It is
a generally recognized industry practice to classify leaf tobacco and wine inventories as
current assets, although part of such inventory, because of the duration of the curing and
aging process, ordinarily would not be used within one year.
ILLUSTRATION GAAP 9.1 U.S. GAAP Inventory, Presentation and Disclosure
GAAP Self-Test Questions
1. All of the following are key similarities between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for inventories except:

a. costs to include in inventories are similar.
b. LIFO cost flow assumption where appropriate is used by both sets of standards.
c. fair value valuation of inventories is prohibited by both sets of standards.
d. guidelines on ownership of goods are similar.
2. All of the following are key differences between U.S. GAAP and IFRS with respect to
accounting for inventories except the:
a. definition of the lower-of-cost-or-market test for inventory valuation differs between
U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
b. average-cost method is prohibited under IFRS.
c. inventory basis determination for write-downs differs between U.S. GAAP and IFRS.
d. guidelines are more principles-based under IFRS than they are under U.S. GAAP.
3. Starfish Company (a company using U.S. GAAP and the LIFO inventory method) is
considering changing to IFRS and the FIFO inventory method. How would a comparison of
these methods affect Starfish’s financials?
a. During a period of inflation, working capital would decrease when IFRS and the FIFO
inventory method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
b. During a period of inflation, the taxes will decrease when IFRS and the FIFO inventory
method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
c. During a period of inflation, net income would be greater if IFRS and the FIFO inventory
method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
d. During a period of inflation, the current ratio would decrease when IFRS and the FIFO
inventory method are used as compared to U.S. GAAP and LIFO.
4. Assume that Darcy Industries had the following inventory values.
Inventory cost (on December 31, 2022)
Inventory market (on December 31, 2022) amount between ceiling and floor $1,280
Inventory net realizable value (on December 31, 2022)
Under U.S. GAAP, what is the inventory carrying value on December 31, 2022?
a. $1,500.
b. $1,570.
c. $1,300.
d. $1,280.
5. Under U.S. GAAP, biological assets:
a. are accounted for the same way as under IFRS.
b. are all to be accounted for in the same way.

c. generally are not accounted for at net realizable value.
d. None of the answer choices is correct.
GAAP Concepts and Application
GAAP9.1 Briefly describe some of the similarities and differences between U.S. GAAP and
IFRS with respect to the accounting for inventories.
GAAP9.2 LaTour SA is based in France and prepares its financial statements in accordance
with IFRS. In 2022, it reported cost of goods sold of €578 million and average inventory of
€154 million. Briefly discuss how analysis of LaTour’s inventory turnover (and comparisons
to a company using U.S. GAAP) might be affected by differences in inventory accounting
between IFRS and U.S. GAAP.
GAAP9.3 Reed Pentak, a finance major, has been following globalization and made the
following observation concerning accounting convergence: “I do not see many obstacles
concerning development of a single accounting standard for inventories.” Prepare a response
to Reed to explain the main obstacle to achieving convergence in the area of inventory
accounting.
Answers to GAAP Self-Test Questions
1.b 2.b 3.c 4.d 5.c
Notes
1 It may be necessary to write down an entire product line or a group of inventories in a given
geographic area that cannot be practicably evaluated separately. However, it is not
appropriate to write down an entire class of inventory, such as finished goods or all
inventory of a particular industry. [3]
2 The rationale for use of the individual-item approach whenever practicable is to avoid
realization of unrealized gains, which can arise when applying LCNRV on a similar-or-
related-items approach (e.g., unrealized gains on some items offset unrealized losses on
other items). In general, IFRS prohibits recognition of unrealized gains in income.
3 Materials and other supplies held for use in the production of inventories are not written
down below cost if the finished products in which they will be incorporated are expected
to be sold at or above cost. However, a decline in the price of materials may indicate that
the cost of the finished products exceeds net realizable value. In this situation, the
materials are written down to net realizable value.
4 Manufacturing companies frequently employ a standardized cost system that both
predetermines the unit costs for material, labor, and manufacturing overhead, and values
raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods inventories at their standard costs.
Standard costs take into account normal levels of materials and supplies, labor, efficiency,
and capacity utilization, and are regularly reviewed and, if necessary, revised in the light of
current conditions. For financial reporting purposes, the standard cost method may be
used for convenience if the results approximate cost. [5] Nokia (FIN) and Hewlett-
Packard (USA) use standard costs for valuing at least a portion of their inventories.

5 A gain may arise on initial recognition of a biological asset, such as when a calf is born. A
gain or loss may arise on initial recognition of agricultural produce as a result of
harvesting. Losses may arise on initial recognition for agricultural assets because costs to
sell are deducted in determining fair value less costs to sell.
6 Measurement at fair value or selling price less point of sale costs corresponds to the net
realizable value measure in the LCNRV test (selling price less estimated costs to complete
and sell) since at harvest, the agricultural product is complete and is ready for sale. [7]
7 Changes in fair value arising from growth and harvesting from mature cows can be
estimated based on changes in the market prices of the cows in the herd, depending on
their age.
8 Minerals and mineral products, such as coal or iron ore, may also be measured at net
realizable value in accordance with well-established industry practices. In the mining
industry, when minerals have been extracted, there is often an assured sale in an active
market, or under a forward contract or government guarantee. Because there is negligible
risk of failure to sell, measurement at net realizable value is justified. In these contexts,
and similar to the accounting for agricultural assets, minerals and mineral products are
recorded at net realizable value at the point of extraction, with a gain recorded in the
period of extraction. In subsequent periods, changes in value of minerals and mineral
products inventory are recognized in profit or loss in the period of the change.
9 In a survey of 175 international companies, commitments to purchase goods and services
were mentioned 83 times. See P. Walters, IFRS Accounting Trends and Techniques
(AICPA, 2012).
10 Such a contract is deemed to be onerous, which is defined as a contract under which the
unavoidable costs of satisfying the obligations exceed the economic benefits expected. [8]
This concept is discussed in more detail in Chapter 13.
11 Appendix 17A provides a complete discussion of hedging and the use of derivatives such as
futures.
12 An alternative method of estimating inventory using the gross profit percentage is
considered by some to be less complicated than the traditional method. This alternative
method uses the standard income statement format as follows. (Assume the same data as
in the Cetus example above.)
Relationships
Solution
Sales revenue
Cost of sales
Beginning inventory
Purchases
Goods available for sale
Ending inventory
(3) ?
(3) 64,000 Est.
Cost of goods sold
(2) ?
(2)196,000 Est.
Gross profit on sales (30%)
(1) ?
(1) 84,000 Est.

Compute the unknowns as follows: first the gross profit amount, then cost of goods sold, and finally the ending
inventory, as shown below.
(1) €280,000 × .30 = €84,000 (gross profit on sales).
(2) €280,000 − €84,000 = €196,000 (cost of goods sold).
(3) €260,000 − €196,000 = €64,000 (ending inventory).
13 The terms gross margin percentage, rate of gross profit, and percentage markup are
synonymous, although companies more commonly use markup in reference to cost and
gross profit in reference to sales.
14 This figure is not really net realizable value, but it is net realizable value less the normal
margin that is allowed. In other words, the sales price of the goods written down is €2, but
subtracting a normal margin of 50 percent (€5 cost ÷ €10 price), the figure becomes €1.
To the extent the profit margin approximates expected costs to complete and sell an item,
this measure approximates net realizable value.
15 When the purchase allowance is not reflected by a reduction in the selling price, no
adjustment is made to the retail column.
16 Note that if employee sales are recorded gross, no adjustment is necessary for employee
discounts in the retail column.